1

GROUP OF TWENTY

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICY CHALLENGES
Meetings of G-20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors
April 18–19, 2013
Washington, DC

Prepared by Staff of the
I N T E R N A T I O N A L M O N E T A R Y F U N D*
*Does not necessarily reflect the views of the IMF Executive Board.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Policy actions have reduced tail risks and financial conditions have improved. Decisive actions in the
euro area and steps to avert the ―fiscal cliff‖ in the United States have contained the immediate threats to
the global economy. Markets have rallied and activity has stabilized. Monetary policy continues to
support demand in advanced economies, helping to offset the drag from fiscal consolidation. In many
emerging economies, credit and activity are propelling each other, reflecting past policy easing and a
resurgence of capital inflows.
Global activity is moving at “three speeds”. Global growth prospects are little changed—weak for
some, improving or strong for others. Among advanced economies, the euro area remains stuck in low
gear given the serious challenges facing EMU; and, in Japan, looking past the stimulus-driven rebound,
private demand and growth are also expected to remain sluggish. In contrast, private demand and
growth prospects in the United States are strengthening as public and private sector balance sheets
mend. Meanwhile, growth in emerging economies is expected to be relatively strong.
While downside risks have receded some, medium-term concerns and challenges remain elevated.
A stagnant euro area still faces downside risks to the short-run outlook, including reemergence of
stresses if policy momentum is not sustained. In the United States, underlying momentum is being
masked by fiscal consolidation; and budget sequestration, if not modified, would lower headline growth
beyond this year. In the medium term, several threats loom—including more protracted economic
weakness and financial fragmentation, adjustment fatigue, and stalled policy implementation in the euro
area; lack of credible fiscal roadmaps in the United States and Japan; possible side effects (including
spillovers) related to an extended period of monetary easing; and negative growth surprises in emerging
economies.
Policymakers face a difficult balancing act in moving from stabilization to growth, but should
build on recent gains to get ahead of the curve:
 Fiscal tightening must continue at a pace that the recovery can handle. Short-term adjustment must
be calibrated carefully, anchored by credible and strong medium-term consolidation plans.
 Monetary policy should remain accommodative but mindful of new risks. Unconventional policies
continue to provide essential support to demand and have lessened bank vulnerabilities in advanced
economies. But vigilance is needed to ensure that a prolonged period of low interest rates and
expanding central bank balance sheets does not give rise to fresh financial excesses. Targeted
macro- and micro-prudential tools may be needed.
 Financial reform should be reinvigorated and support growth. The process remains incomplete but its
pace and direction should avoid making it harder for banks to lend as the economy regains strength.
Improved financial policies can also help the transmission of monetary policy.
 Emerging economies should rebuild buffers and may need to recalibrate policies. Stronger growth
allows policy buffers to be gradually rebuilt over time. Policymakers must also remain alert to rising
domestic financial vulnerabilities. Capital inflows may require adjustment to the policy mix.
___________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Prepared by a team from the IMF’s Research Department, led by Hamid Faruqee and Emil Stavrev and including
Troy Matheson, Joong Shik Kang, Eric Bang, Shuda Li, Shanti Karunaratne, Anne Lalramnghakhleli Moses, and
Gabi Ionescu.

2

I.

DEVELOPMENTS & OUTLOOK

Financial conditions have improved as policy actions have reduced short-term risks to financial
stability. However, the recovery remains unbalanced—unusually weak in the euro area with
downside risks while gradually strengthening in the United States, and relatively strong in
emerging and developing economies—highlighting key factors still weighing on underlying
growth prospects. In advanced economies, low policy interest rates will likely translate only
slowly into more dynamic bank lending and private spending as balance sheets mend, while
fiscal positions consolidate. At the same time, in many emerging economies, credit and activity
are propelling each other, while policies try to manage some resurgence in volatile capital
inflows.
1.
Financial markets have rallied as policies have mitigated tail risks. Global
financial stability has improved since last year following key actions and risk appetite has
increased—fueling a rally in asset prices.1 Equity prices in both advanced and emerging
economies have posted strong gains since mid-2012. On the heels of strengthened policy
action and commitments to ease concerns about the integrity of the euro area and a lastminute deal to avoid the worst of the U.S. fiscal cliff, market volatility has fallen to pre-crisis
levels. Elevated spreads in the euro area periphery have narrowed appreciably and some
have successfully placed large volumes of syndicated bonds. Nevertheless, confidence
remains fragile. Renewed volatility emerged in response to political uncertainty in Italy and
terms of the financial support package for Cyprus. Market contagion from the latter appears
limited (mainly to Greece and Russia) but has renewed concerns about policies and the
credibility of the crisis response in Europe.
Periphery Minus Core Credit Default
Swap Spreads

FTSE Global Equity Index
(January4, 2010=100; All-Cap)

(basis points)

150
U.S.

Europe

500

Emerging

Sovereigns

Banks

140
400

130
120

300

110
200

100
90

100

80
70
Jan-10

3/20
Jan-11

Jan-12

Jan-13

Source: Haver Analytics.

1

See Global Financial Stability Report (April 2013).

3/20
0
Jan-10
Jan-11
Jan-12
Jan-13
Sources: Bloomberg, L.P.; and IMF staff estimates.
Note: Sovereign index is weighted by GDP, and the
bank index is weighted by assets.

3
2.
Global growth, however, is moving at “three speeds.‖ Notwithstanding improved
financial conditions, economic activity at the end of 2012 was subdued and had a sluggish
start in 2013. Financial conditions are not translating into growth evenly and other factors
are acting as brakes. Europe remains stuck in low gear given challenges facing EMU and,
following recession, Japan will see a stimulus-driven rebound; while private demand has
shown some strength in the United States as underlying momentum picks up. Many
emerging and developing economies enjoy high growth, even if this is somewhat lower than
before the crisis.
3.
The unbalanced nature of the recovery in advanced economies reflects key
brakes and policy challenges. Fiscal consolidation and weak balance sheets continue to
weigh on demand, alongside financial fragmentation in the case of the euro area. But
important differences in growth momentum have emerged. Specifically:



Activity was surprisingly weak in the euro area, including in parts of the core. Recent
indicators have not shown as much evidence of stabilization as hoped, despite
improvements in market sentiment. Weakness has spread from the periphery to the core.
Credit conditions remain tight, and transmission of low policy rates to the real economy
is weak as high financial fragmentation persists. Periphery banks are still hobbled by
poor profitability and low capital. Corporations in the periphery, meanwhile, are being
directly affected by bank balance sheet weakness, cyclical pressures, and, in many cases,
sizeable debt overhangs.



In Japan, the economy will see a fiscal and monetary stimulus-driven rebound this year.
Real GDP growth is expected to reach 1.6 percent in 2013, following negative growth in
the second half of 2012, given expansionary policies this year. However, this raises the
challenge to restore long-term soundness to public finances, meanwhile prospects for
private demand growth remain subdued.



In contrast, underlying U.S. economic prospects are steadily improving. U.S. private
demand has been showing some strength, as credit and housing markets are healing,
though larger-than-expected fiscal adjustment is projected to keep U.S. real GDP growth
at about 2 percent in 2013. Household and bank balance sheets—as house prices begin
to rise again and stock markets move higher—are healthier now.

4.
Reaccelerating activity in emerging economies has been encouraging. In Asia,
growth has already returned to a healthy pace in China, and in India external demand, solid
consumption, and policy improvements are expected to lift activity. Growth in Latin America
will strengthen this year, with activity in Brazil expected to recover in response to the large
policy rate cuts deployed during the past year as well as to measures targeted at boosting
private investment. Risks of a hard landing in key emerging economies have receded, in

4
part due to policy action following a noticeable albeit temporary slowdown last year,
though estimates of potential growth have been marked down in recent years for some
large economies. With consumer demand resilient, macroeconomic policy on hold, and
exports reviving, many economies are now seeing higher growth. Capital flows have picked
up again.
Global Manufacturing PMI

Merchandise Exports

(Index; >50 = expansion; sa)

(percent; 3mma annualized)

Advanced

60

Emerging

Advanced

80

Emerging

60

55

40

50

20

45

0
-20

40

-40
35
Feb. 13

30

-60

Feb. 13

-80
05

06

07

08

09

10

Source: IMF, Global Data Source.

11

12

13

05

06

07

08

09

10

11

12

13

Source: IMF, Global Data Source.

5.
Fiscal deficits in advanced economies continue to narrow steadily overall.
Deficits in advanced economies narrowed last year by ¾ percent of GDP, with a slightly
faster pace expected in 2013.2 U.S. fiscal policy is expected to tighten even more than in
2012 as budget sequestration has now begun. Fiscal tightening is becoming excessive from
a cyclical standpoint, leaving a high burden on monetary policy to support demand. In the
euro area, the pace of consolidation is expected to decline somewhat in 2013, reflecting a
slowing in Germany and Italy. In Japan, with new stimulus, the fiscal stance will ease
moderately this year, but is expected to tighten markedly in 2014 as stimulus and
reconstruction spending unwind and the consumption tax increases (from 5 to 8 percent). In
the United Kingdom, the pace of structural fiscal consolidation is 1 percent of GDP in FY
13/14 and slower than previously planned. However, given weak nominal growth, the debt
outlook has worsened, and the authorities have appropriately allowed meeting the
Supplementary Debt Target by two years later than envisaged in 2010.
6.
In emerging economies, fiscal policy is projected to remain close to neutral.
Elevated growth will push debt ratios farther down, to 26 percent of GDP by 2018. However,
some countries continue to face significant fiscal challenges—for example, Middle Eastern
oil importers, several emerging EU economies, and India.

2

See Fiscal Monitor (April 2013).

5
7.
Monetary policy continues to support domestic demand while public finances
consolidate. Advanced economies continue to rely heavily on highly accommodative and
unconventional monetary policy to provide essential support to aggregate demand, helping
offset fiscal drag. Financial conditions in the euro area have improved following the ECB
announcement of OMT but pass through to bank credit and lending rates, particularly in the
periphery, remains muted. The Fed enhanced its forward policy guidance and renewed
purchases of longer-term Treasuries; and the Bank of Japan strengthened its resolve to exit
deflation by announcing a bolder monetary framework in an effort to achieve its higher
inflation target of 2 percent within 2 years. Net benefits from unconventional policies remain
favorable, but side effects—including future risks to financial stability—should be closely
watched and managed.3
8.
Lagging recovery and strong monetary stimulus in advanced economies has
placed pressure on currencies and capital flows. Capital flows have been volatile
throughout the course of the global recovery
Total Flows
(billions of U.S. dollars; mutual funds)
reflecting inter alia changing risk perceptions and
Bond
Equity
Total
low policy rates in advanced economies. With
30
short-term financial risks abating, bond and equity 25
flows to emerging economies have surged 20
recently, increasing upward pressure on their 15
exchange rates and, raising concerns among some 10
5
emerging economies of ―competitive devaluation.‖
0
Concerns resurfaced once again recently, when -5
plans for looser monetary policy in Japan -10
prompted a large depreciation of the yen. -15
Feb. 13
10
11
12
13
However, there currently appears to be no major
Source: Haver Analytics.
deviations of main currencies from medium-term
fundamentals (see Box). Neverthless, attendant risks related to the financial sector bear
wathching. In some emerging economies, capital flows over the last few years have also
been associated with higher corporate leverage and foreign currency denominated debt;
and sharply rising non-residents’ holdings of local currency sovereign bonds. A continuation
of these trends would increase financial stability risks.4

3

See ―Do Central Bank Policies Since the Crisis Carry Risks to Financial Stability,‖ Chapter 3, GFSR (April 2013).

4

See Chapter 2, GFSR (April 2013).

6
Capital Flows, Exchange Rates, and Policy Spillovers
Alongside the unbalanced nature of the recovery, interest rates have remained exceptionally low in advanced
economies for an extended period. Thus, unsurprisingly, when risk perceptions have improved through the
course of the recovery, capital has relocated from advanced to emerging economies and affected exchange
rates. Some economies remain concerned about spillovers from easy monetary policy and depreciating
currencies in advanced economies. To defuse tensions, the way forward is to focus on collective policies that
foster external and internal balance.
While capital flows have been volatile alongside changing risk perceptions, flows also reflect better
long-term prospects in many emerging markets. With higher potential growth and lower debt, many
emerging markets today look like good locations for investment given the outlook for advanced
economies. This leads to structural capital inflows with significant economic benefits for recipients. Capital
flows are also justified by the weaker cyclical position of advanced countries, which is consistent with
temporary exchange rates weakness. This is part of how they can recover. Loose monetary policy (including
unconventional policies) in many advanced countries has been targeted at sustaining internal demand and
to support banks and near-term financial stability, which benefits the health of the global economy. In
some cases, it can restore confidence and lead to domestic currency appreciation as was seen in the case of
the euro following introduction of OMT.
Complaints about “competitive devaluation” appear overstated. Since 2007, adjustment in real
exchange rates has facilitated a narrowing of global imbalances. Currencies appreciated in surplus
economies and depreciated in deficit economies. There appears to be no major deviations of the main
currencies from medium-term fundamentals. The IMF
Real Effective Exchange Rate
(percent change from June 2012 to February 2013)
assessment in the July 2012 Pilot External Sector Report and
10
developments in exchange rates and WEO current account
8
projections since then indicate that the real effective
6
exchange rates of the euro area and the U.S. are modestly
4
stronger relative to medium-term fundamentals. Evidence
2
on the valuation of Japan’s real effective exchange rate is
0
more mixed. As for surplus economies, including China and
-2
-4
Korea, in most cases, currencies remain moderately weaker
-6
than desirable, despite welcome adjustments (most notably
-8
less accumulation of reserves).
-10

MEX
RUS
KOR
IND
BRA
Euro
TUR
AUS
CAN
CHN
USA
SAU
IDN
GBR
ARG
ZAF
JPN

The best way to address “currency worries” is for all to
pursue policies that foster internal and external balance.
Source: IMF, Global Data Source.
In the advanced economies, this requires more progress
with medium- and long-term fiscal adjustment plans, entitlement reform, and balance sheet repair. Shortterm fiscal policies could then be less restrictive, which, together with better balance sheets, would relieve
pressure from overburdening monetary policy. Emerging market economies, in turn, face different
challenges. China should allow its exchange rate to be more market determined and should implement
structural policies to rebalance the economy toward consumption-driven growth. Other economies need to
deploy structural policies to foster the healthy absorption of capital inflows. If inflows pose macroeconomic
or financial stability risks, countries can respond with macroeconomic and financial policies, accompanied,
in some circumstances, by capital-flow-management measures.

7
9.
Looking ahead, global growth should firm gradually as financial conditions and
confidence continue to improve. Global growth forecasts remain broadly unchanged from
January.5 Real GDP growth is forecast to reach 3¼ percent on an annual average basis in
2013 and 4 percent in 2014. In advanced economies, easier financial conditions,
accommodative monetary policies, and recovering confidence will support a gradual
reacceleration of activity, notwithstanding tight fiscal policy. In emerging and developing
economies, the expansion of output is expected to become broad based, accelerating
steadily from about 5 percent in the first half of 2012 to around 6 percent in 2013–14, driven
by easy macroeconomic conditions and recovering demand from the advanced economies.
10.
In advanced economies, maintained low policy rates will likely translate only
slowly into more dynamic bank lending, particularly in the euro area. In the United
States, the rate of credit growth has been picking up gradually, and bank-lending conditions
have been relaxing slowly from very tight levels. However, in the euro area, credit continues
to contract and lending conditions continue to tighten, albeit at a slower pace, largely
reflecting the situation in the periphery economies but also the poor macroeconomic
outlook for the region as a whole.
11.
In many emerging economies, credit and activity are propelling alongside a
resurgence in capital inflows. With a few exceptions, central banks have held policy rates
constant or cut them modestly in response to the 2012 slowdown. Real policy rates thus
remain well below pre-2008 levels. At the same time, however, economic activity and capital
inflows are reaccelerating, which may boost bank funding and ease credit conditions further.
These factors have broadened the access of emerging market sovereigns and corporate to
debt financing, and may reinforce economic growth. However, monetary and regulatory
authorities should proactively manage attendant vulnerabilities—rising leverage, increased
exposure to foreign currency liabilities, and potentially greater sensitivity of local
government bond markets to outflows.

II. KEY RISKS
Policy actions have reduced short-term tail risks and upside risks have emerged, but mediumterm challenges remain significant.
12.
Short-term downside risks have been alleviated. Acute risks to near-term financial
stability have been reduced significantly, though gains need to be entrenched by additional
action. In the euro area, financial market confidence gains remain fragile, with markets
vulnerable to shifts in sentiment given financial fragmentation. Downside risks to the outlook
5

See World Economic Outlook (April 2013).

8
include stagnation and the reemergence of stresses if policy momentum is not sustained, or
events in Cyprus may renew concerns about banks and the adequacy of the policy
framework in place. Steady fiscal consolidation in advanced economies has helped lower
short-term fiscal risks, but uncertainties remain here too. In the United States, budget
sequestration and a failure to smoothly raise the debt ceiling could restrain economic
activity, as some federal operations could be seriously affected until funding is restored. The
drag on growth could be much greater if confidence in policymakers begins to erode; and a
possible failure to smoothly raise the debt ceiling later this year could be very damaging to
the global economy. However, some upside risks have begun to appear. U.S. growth could
be higher than projected, if financial market strength reinvigorates business and consumer
confidence more robustly, boosting investment and durables consumption.
13.

Medium-term downside risks remain elevated. These stem from:



In the euro area, financial system strain and very low growth or stagnation. In the
periphery, amid high taxes, tight lending conditions, corporate debt overhang, and weak
domestic demand, investment may fail to gain momentum, and thus, growth may
disappoint. As long as periphery sovereigns maintain market access, the damage to
growth may be contained, but growth could be much worse if persistent stagnation
entrenches pessimism, stalls policy implementation, and rekindles doubts about the
monetary union.



In the United States and Japan, continued absence of credible medium-term plans to
address unsustainable public finances. Political gridlock in the United States has
prevented comprehensive reform‖ so far; and the medium-term fiscal situation in Japan
has worsened with a new bout of fiscal stimulus. Thus, a longer-term risk is that market
perceptions doubt these economies’ political systems ability to deliver the required
adjustments in a timely fashion, thereby increasing risk premiums with potentially large
effects on the global economy. More generally, public debt remains too high in light of
likely higher financing costs when monetary policy normalizes, concerns about future
growth, and aging pressures.



Ultra accommodative monetary policy in advanced economies. If excess supply is less than
estimated, actual and expected inflation may increase more than anticipated. Also,
unexpected side effects (including cross-border spillovers) from an extended period of
very low policy rates may lead to heightened sensitivity to interest rate hikes later and
associated financial vulnerabilities (such as risky lending, balance sheet mismatches,
liquidity risks, delayed restructuring, and high leverage). Finally, large central bank
balance sheets may be hard to unwind when exit conditions are met, creating tensions
between price and financial stability objectives.



In emerging economies, even weaker potential growth. While cyclical factors have played a
role for the weaker-than-expected activity in key economies over the past couple of

9
years, so too have shocks that are more permanent. Serial disappointments in forecasts
may be symptomatic of deeper, structural problems heralding lower investment and
lower growth. Meanwhile, credit booms during the period of rapid growth in the past
may leave domestic financial systems vulnerable to weaker growth outlooks going
forward. Exceptionally accommodative monetary policy in advanced economies can have
adverse side effects, including excessively high asset prices and more foreign currency
borrowing in emerging economies and associated misallocation of resources and risks
that should be monitored. This also includes risks from capital flow reversals or ―sudden
stops.‖

III. POLICY IMPERATIVES
Notwithstanding recent improvements, policymakers can ill afford to become complacent and
should take advantage of recent gains to get ahead of the curve. Beyond securing the recent
gains to financial stability, they face difficult challenges to move from durable financial
stabilization to robust real growth—which has remained elusive so far. The imperatives remain
broadly the same.
14.
Policymakers face a difficult balancing act given challenging tradeoffs.
Advanced economies need to further repair public and private balance sheets while
supporting demand and strengthening growth. Restoring the soundness of public finances
requires tangible progress on consolidation, but care is needed to avoid harming the
recovery where private demand remains weak. Advancing financial reform to safeguard
stability is also imperative but too fast and/or uneven actions across countries can be
counterproductive. At the same time, restructuring private sector debt will have
consequences for lenders. Thus, a comprehensive approach on all fronts, that manages well
the underlying tradeoffs, seems a requisite to achieve a lasting and robust recovery.
15.
Fiscal tightening must continue at a pace that preserves the recovery. Policy
makers must aim to nurture short-term recovery and have credible medium-term
adjustment plans to help anchor expectations and gain flexibility.


Short-term adjustment must be calibrated appropriately. However, some advanced
economies where private demand has been chronically disappointing should consider
smoothing the pace of consolidation, if they have the room for maneuver. In the United
Kingdom, for example, greater flexibility in the pace of near-term fiscal consolidation
should be considered given the weak recovery owing to lackluster demand. More
generally, if growth surprises on the upside policymakers should reduce headline deficits
faster, aiming for fiscal balances in cyclically-adjusted or structural terms.

10


Comprehensive and ambitious consolidation plans and entitlement reform are
instrumental given tradeoffs facing fiscal policy. In the United States, agreement on a
credible fiscal roadmap could help create some short-term policy space, mitigate risks of
excessive near-term consolidation, and ease the burden currently placed on monetary
policy. In Japan, the recent fiscal stimulus makes developing a credible fiscal plan that
stabilizes and reduces debt even more urgent. Progress on medium-term fiscal reform
would also help quell concerns about political pressure on central banks to keep interest
rates too low longer than warranted, given the massive purchases by various central
banks of government paper since 2008. It will create greater scope to pursue supportive
monetary policy without triggering concern about central bank independence or a
resurgence of inflation.

16.
Monetary policy should remain accommodative but mindful of new and
evolving risks. Minimal room remains to lower policy rates in key advanced economies,
except the euro area, and monetary transmission may be hindered by the state of the
financial sector. Better central bank communications may help bring down real interest rates
and provide added support to demand, including by reassuring markets against premature
tightening. Japan’s newly announced easing measures to achieve a new 2 percent inflation
target within 2 years are welcome but they need to be accompanied by ambitious growth
and fiscal strategies to reduce risks and ensure sustained recovery that benefits Japan and
other economies. Central bank purchases of assets, long-term refinancing operations, and
other interventions in financial markets are helping to reduce funding costs and strengthen
confidence, but there may be worsening tradeoffs, including credit misallocation.
Policymakers should employ appropriate macro- and micro-prudential tools to mitigate such
outcomes. Central banks must decide what more, if anything, to do and prepare for an
eventual exit from unconventional monetary policies.
17.
Financial policies need to secure stability and support recovery. The reform
agenda is unfinished and needs to be reinvigorated to strengthen the global financial
system. Further action is needed to recapitalize, restructure, or resolve weak banks and
improve the flow of credit to the economy, particularly in Europe. This would help passthrough of monetary accommodation. Like fiscal policy, the pace of financial reform to
safeguard stability—such as higher capital and liquidity buffers—should be carefully
calibrated to support bank lending and real growth, while avoiding unnecessary delays that
can be a source of regulatory uncertainty that can deter the willingness to lend. Consistent
implementation and international cooperation is also critical for a level playing field and
reducing fragmentation.


Reversing financial fragmentation in the euro area, in particular, is critical for supporting
growth. The priorities are bank balance sheet repair and further steps toward a stronger
EU financial oversight framework. Scope for direct bank recapitalization through the

11
European Stability Mechanism (ESM) is needed. Legislative agreements should be
adopted expeditiously to ensure timely and effective implementation of the Single
Supervisory Mechanism (SSM); the Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) should become
operational at around the same time; and tangible progress should be made toward a
common deposit insurance guarantee scheme. Greater fiscal integration, with a common
fiscal backstop for a credible banking union, remains a priority. At the national level,
countries should press on with needed repair of bank, household, and corporate balance
sheets.
18.
Structural policies should tackle high unemployment and rebuild
competitiveness. Rebuilding competitiveness is a particular challenge for periphery
economies in the euro area. Large external imbalances in these economies were rooted, in
varying degrees, in strong import growth, changes in external funding (from transfers to
debt), and deteriorating income balances. Export market shares, by contrast, held up
relatively well. The challenge for these economies is to engineer a recovery amid tighter
external funding constraints. This will require policies to boost productivity and foster jobfriendly wage setting to achieve sustained gains in export market shares.
19.
The challenge for emerging economies is to recalibrate policy settings and
rebuild policy buffers. With global prospects improving, the policy stance in many of these
economies is still very accommodative, supporting domestic amid weak external demand
from advanced economies. However, the appropriate policy mix varies considerably across
countries. In general:


Policy buffers should be gradually rebuilt. Although public debt ratios in most emerging
economies are lower than in advanced economies, there is a risk that debt dynamics
could become less benign. Where supply factors (e.g., infrastructure or labor market
bottlenecks) and domestic policy factors (policy uncertainty and regulatory obstacles)
have contributed to the recent stalling of investment (e.g., Brazil, India, and Russia) there
are downside risks to growth potential. Combined with upside risks to bond yields,
interest-growth differentials could become less favorable. Therefore, the need for fiscal
consolidation may be more urgent where debt ratios are already high, or fiscal deficits
are large.



Capital inflows may require adjustments to the policy mix. Policymakers must remain alert
to overheating risks as well as rising domestic financial vulnerabilities. Monetary policy
tightening may encourage these flows, which will boost credit and thus reduce its
effectiveness. Economies with external surpluses should provide room for monetary
tightening by allowing currencies to appreciate, while economies with external deficits
may need to consider tightening macroprudential measures or using capital flow

12
management measures in conjunction with monetary tightening. These economies
should also consider greater emphasis on fiscal tightening.
20.
Global imbalances have narrowed considerably, but old policy challenges
remain unaddressed. Most of the adjustment took place during the initial phase of the
crisis, alongside global recession. Adjustment in real exchange rates since then has broadly
gone in the right direction—with currencies appreciating in surplus economies and
depreciating in deficit economies. Nevertheless, narrower imbalances largely reflect demand
compression from correcting financial excesses, not desirable fiscal and structural
adjustments. Accordingly, China needs to continue to promote greater consumption-driven
growth and allow markets to play a stronger role in determining the exchange rate; and
Germany needs reforms to boost domestic demand, notably investment. The United States
should raise saving, by proceeding with medium-term fiscal consolidation, and further
improve its current account position. Likewise, other deficit economies need further fiscal
adjustment and structural reforms to boost competitiveness, particularly in the euro area
periphery.

13

Table 1. Real GDP Growth
(Percent change)
Year over Year Averages
Projections

Q4 over Q4
Projections

2011

2012

2013

2014

2013

2014

World 1/
Advanced economies
Euro area
Emerging market and developing countries 2/
Advanced G-20
Emerging G-20

4.0
1.6
1.4
6.4
1.6
7.4

3.2
1.2
-0.6
5.1
1.5
5.4

3.3
1.2
-0.3
5.3
1.4
5.9

4.0
2.2
1.1
5.7
2.3
6.3

3.6
2.0
0.6
5.7
2.1
6.2

4.0
2.3
1.1
5.9
2.2
6.3

G-20 3/
Argentina 4/
Australia
Brazil
Canada
China
France
Germany
India
Indonesia
Italy
Japan
Korea
Mexico
Russia
Saudi Arabia
South Africa
T urkey
United Kingdom
United States
European Union

4.2
8.9
2.4
2.7
2.6
9.3
1.7
3.1
7.7
6.5
0.4
-0.6
3.6
3.9
4.3
8.5
3.5
8.5
0.9
1.8
1.6

3.3
1.9
3.6
0.9
1.8
7.8
0.0
0.9
4.0
6.2
-2.4
2.0
2.0
3.9
3.4
6.8
2.5
2.6
0.2
2.2
-0.2

3.5
2.8
3.0
3.0
1.5
8.0
-0.1
0.6
5.7
6.3
-1.5
1.6
2.8
3.4
3.4
4.4
2.8
3.4
0.7
1.9
0.0

4.2
3.5
3.3
4.0
2.4
8.2
0.9
1.5
6.2
6.4
0.5
1.4
3.9
3.4
3.8
4.2
3.3
3.7
1.5
3.0
1.3

4.0
3.6
3.4
3.8
2.0
7.8
0.4
1.5
5.8
6.5
-0.4
3.8
4.2
4.0
4.8
…
3.4
3.7
1.1
2.2
0.9

4.1
3.1
3.2
4.1
2.5
8.3
1.0
1.1
6.2
6.5
0.6
-0.1
3.1
3.0
2.9
…
3.2
4.0
1.5
3.4
1.2

Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook April 2013.
1/ The quarterly estimates and projections account for 90 percent of the world purchasing-power-parity weights.
2/ The quarterly estimates and projections account for approximately 80 percent of the emerging market and developing countries.
3/ G-20 aggregations exclude European Union.
4/ The data for Argentina are officially reported data. The IMF has, however, issued a declaration of censure and called on
Argentina to adopt remedial measures to address the quality of the official GDP data. Alternative data sources have shown
significantly lower real growth than the official data since 2008. In this context, the IMF is also using alternative estimates of GDP
growth for the surveillance of macroeconomic developments in Argentina.

