      
GROUP OF TWENTY

 

UPDATE ON GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICY CHALLENGES 
G-20 Leaders’ Summit
September 5–6, 2013
St. Petersburg

Prepared by Staff of the
I N T E R N A T I O N A L M O N E T A R Y F U N D*
*Does not necessarily reflect the views of the IMF Executive Board.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This report provides an interim update of global developments and risks since the July Surveillance Note.
Global growth remains subdued but its underlying dynamics are changing. At the global level, major
economies are seeing increasingly different growth dynamics and their relative cyclical positions are
changing. Recent indicators point to stronger underlying activity in several advanced economies while
key emerging economies have slowed. The impulse to global growth is expected to come mainly from
the United States in the near term.
Against this background, financial conditions are generally tighter and market pressures have
become acute for some emerging economies. Emerging economies were hardest hit following Fed
“tapering” remarks and disappointing news about their growth. More recently, market pressures have
been concentrated in certain emerging economies with important vulnerabilities. Both push and pull
factors appear at work with respect to capital flow reversals and continued heightened market volatility
for some—driven by changing expectations of monetary tightening in advanced economies and weaker
fundamentals locally in key emerging economies.
Downside risks remain and some have become more prominent. Attention has heightened recently
on risks related to recent growth disappointments in emerging economies that could interact with risks
related to unwinding of unconventional monetary policies in some advanced economies. This raises more
serious risks for certain emerging economies with higher macroeconomic and financial vulnerabilities.
Although policymakers continue to show resolve to keep the global economy away from the precipice,
the greatest worry may well be a prolonged period of sluggish global growth (a plausible downside).
Strengthened global action is needed to revitalize growth and better manage risks. In an
environment of ongoing but incomplete transition to financial stability, changing growth dynamics and
concerns about slow growth and high unemployment, achieving a better policy mix through
implementation of priorities highlighted during the IMF Spring Meetings remains urgent. Specifically:
 In advanced economies, exceptional monetary accommodation continues to provide important
support to demand but must be complemented by commensurate efforts and progress on other
policies to succeed. In particular, a measured pace of fiscal tightening with good composition,
anchored by credible debt reduction plans, including entitlement reform remains important; while in
the euro area, reversing financial fragmentation and unlocking credit supply through repairing banks’
balance sheets and advancing on a credible banking union remains crucial.
 In emerging economies, cyclical positions and vulnerabilities vary and policy responses will need to be
country specific. Policymakers should allow exchange rates to respond to changing fundamentals but
may need to guard against risks of disorderly adjustment, including through intervention to smooth
excessive volatility. Where monetary policy frameworks are less credible, efforts may need to focus
more on providing a stronger nominal anchor. With weaker growth prospects and potential problems
from prolonged rapid credit growth, the policy framework must be ready to handle possible further
increases in financial instability and risks to growth. Fiscal policy, generally, should allow stabilizers to
work but avoid stimulus unless a major slowdown looms. Gradual consolidation should continue in
countries with large deficits and debt, in part to rebuild buffers.
__________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Prepared by a team from the IMF’s Research Department led by Hamid Faruqee and Emil Stavrev, with support
from Eric Bang and Shuda Li.

DEVELOPMENTS, OUTLOOK, AND RISKS
1.
Global growth remains subdued but its underlying dynamics are changing. Global
growth remains lackluster, averaging about 2¾ percent in
Global Manufacturing PMI
the first half of 2013. Major economies are seeing
(index; >50 = expansion; sa)
increasingly different growth dynamics and their relative
Advanced
Emerging
60
cyclical positions are changing. Recent indicators have
55
been encouraging for advanced economies. U.S. private
demand continues to strengthen with improving housing
50
and labor markets. Euro area activity is growing again,
45
while emerging economies have slowed. Looking ahead,
global activity is expected to strengthen moderately, with
40
global growth projected to increase in 2014 from 2013.
35
Momentum is projected to come mainly from advanced
Jul. 13
30
economies, where output is expected to accelerate. This
05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13
reflects a stronger U.S. economy, significantly less fiscal
Source: IMF, Global Data Source.
tightening (except in Japan), and highly accommodative
monetary conditions. Specifically:


The U.S. and Japan are broadly advancing as expected. U.S. growth surprised on the downside in
Q1, but private demand remains relatively robust in the face of fiscal tightening. Growth is
projected to pick up next year as fiscal policy becomes less restrictive. In Japan, the adoption of
fiscal stimulus and aggressive monetary easing has led to an impressive pick-up in output.
However, growth will be more subdued in 2014, as stimulus and reconstruction spending
unwind and the first stage of the consumption tax increase is implemented.



The euro area is emerging from recession but activity is expected to remain subdued. After six
quarters of contraction, activity expanded in Q2 (by 0.3 percent qoq). While this partly reflects
one-off effects (e.g., weather related factors), recent indicators show a continued improvement
in business indicators, suggesting a continuation of the recovery in Q3. The fiscal drag will
moderate in 2014 (¼ percent of GDP versus 1 percent in 2013), but impediments to growth
persist, especially in the periphery where financial fragmentation continues to hinder credit
flows.



Emerging and developing economies show slower momentum. Staff’s growth projections for the
near term are being revised downward for emerging economies with risks still to the downside.
Emerging economy growth is some 2½ percentage points below 2010 levels, with Brazil, China
and India mainly accounting for this growth slowdown. The outlook for many commodity
exporters (including those among the BRICS) has also deteriorated due to lower commodity
prices.

2

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

2.
Against this background, financial conditions are generally tighter and market
pressures continue for some emerging economies. Emerging economies were hardest hit
following Fed “tapering” remarks and external financing pressures remain heightened in some
economies (e.g., Brazil, India, Indonesia, Turkey and South Africa). Initially, portfolio outflows from
emerging markets in May-June was more broad based, while more recently market pressures have
been more concentrated on particular economies with important financial or macroeconomic
vulnerabilities. Volatility and local bond yields increased sharply, equity markets and currencies fell
(depreciating 6½ percent on average since May 22), and some emerging economies saw liquidity
pressures and a reversal of capital flows. Recent financial
Policy Rate Expectations 1/
turbulence and continued market pressures in some
(percent; months on x-axis; dashed lines are
economies appear to be driven by both push and pull 0.8 from the April 2013 WEO)
factors.
U.S.
Europe
U.K.
0.7





0.6

On the push side, global financial conditions have
tightened as market conviction has increased that U.S.
monetary policy is approaching a turning point and
expectations of policy rate hikes have been brought
forward. Fed “tapering” is now seen as a possibility as
early as September. U.S. 10-year yields are up by 80 bps
to nearly 3 percent since May 22nd. Capital is being
attracted to major developed markets by higher nominal
yields. In Europe, long-term interest rates have increased
modestly in the U.K. and core euro area countries, while
periphery spreads (excl. Portugal) have stabilized since
June.

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
t

t+12

t+24

t+36

Source: Bloomberg, L.P.
1/ Expectations are based on the federal funds rate
for the United States, the sterling overnight interbank
average rate for the United Kingdom, and the euro
interbank offered forward rate for Europe; updated
August 29, 2013.

On the pull side, deteriorating fundamentals in some emerging economies have also played a
role. Recent indicators point to lower growth driven by weaker domestic and external demand.
Increases in interest rates (i.e., changes in risk premia) and exchange rate depreciation pressures
have been differentiated across countries, with high inflation or high external deficit economies
being most affected. Some continue to see heightened market pressure. In particular, the
situation has been exacerbated by disappointing news about emerging market growth and
existing or rising domestic financial and/or macroeconomic vulnerabilities (e.g., high inflation,
balance of payment pressures, India, Brazil, Indonesia, Turkey, South Africa; still rapid credit
growth, Brazil, China, Turkey).
EM Bond and Equity Flows

Change in 10 Year Bonds since May 22

(USD in millions; EPFR data)
3000

Bonds

Equities

2000
1000
0
-1000
-2000
-3000
-4000
-5000
Germany

Japan

China

U.S.

Korea

U.K.

Russia

Source: Bloomberg, L.P.

Mexico

India

Brazil

South Africa

Turkey

Indonesia

(percent; as of August 29, 2013)
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5

-6000
Apr-13

May-13 Jun-13

Jul-13

8/21
Aug-13

Source: Haver analytics.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

3

3.
Downside risks remain and some have become more prominent. Attention has
heightened recently on risks related to recent growth disappointments in emerging economies that
could interact with risks related to unwinding of unconventional monetary policies in some
advanced economies. Fed tapering of asset purchases may trigger exchange rate and financial
market overshooting in emerging market economies, while they are trying to cope with rising
domestic vulnerabilities and slower growth. This raises more serious risks for certain emerging
economies where macroeconomic and financial vulnerabilities are higher. In the euro area, despite
some welcome stabilization, financial market stress could still re-emerge from incomplete delivery of
policy commitments at the national or euro area level. In Japan, insufficient fiscal consolidation and
structural reform over time in Japan could trigger serious downside risks. Overall, concerns about a
prolonged period of sluggish global growth (a plausible downside scenario) remain elevated.

POLICIES FOR JOBS AND GROWTH
4.
More policy ambition and cooperation are needed to achieve the G-20’s shared
objectives of strong, sustainable, and balanced growth. The problems facing the global economy
are complex and joint action can help. In an environment of ongoing but incomplete transition to
financial stability, changing growth dynamics and concerns about slow growth and high
unemployment, achieving a better policy mix is important. A heavy reliance on unconventional
monetary policy (UMP), for example, has had overall positive effects and has bought time but needs
support from other policies to succeed. Widespread financial, fiscal, and structural impediments
need to be addressed to bolster growth and financial stability.


In advanced economies, while exceptional monetary accommodation, including through UMP,
continues to provide important support to the recovery, potential side effects should be
monitored closely and addressed as needed. Clear communication of central bank intentions is
vital to help avoid new financial excesses or abrupt reversals of capital flows. There is scope for
better cooperation on withdrawal of UMP, especially through wider central bank discussions of
exit plans. At the same time, progress on other fronts is crucial. In particular, implementing a
measured pace of fiscal tightening (based on a consolidation mix that is supportive of mediumterm growth) including entitlement reform remains central. This should be anchored by credible
plans for debt reduction—notably, for the U.S. and Japan. For economies not under market
pressure, achieving structural fiscal targets and allowing automatic stabilizers to play freely is
key. In the euro area, bank balance sheet repair remain essential to restore confidence and
revive credit growth, and policymakers should make further progress on banking union through
a Single Supervisory Mechanism and a Single Resolution Mechanism, and advance structural
reforms. Additional unconventional monetary support (targeted long term refinancing
operations, lower collateral haircuts) could also help reduce fragmentation and restore monetary
transmission.



In emerging economies, cyclical positions and vulnerabilities vary across countries, with some
facing more intense market pressures, and policy responses will need to be country specific. In
general, policy responses should be anchored by sound and credible monetary policy

4

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

frameworks; allow exchange rate adjustment; and pursue structural reforms to boost jobs and
growth, with the appropriate country-specific policy mix depending on their respective
circumstances. In particular:
 Policymakers should allow exchange rates to respond to changes in fundamentals but may
need to guard against risks of disorderly adjustment. Liquidity provision to maintain orderly
conditions may be needed where very rapid flows lead to financial market disruption. Risks
of disorderly conditions in currency markets are likely to be less acute for those economies
that have strong policy frameworks, deeper financial markets, sound balance sheets, and
limited non-resident portfolio investment. While some intervention to smooth current
market volatility may be appropriate in countries with adequate reserves, it should not
forestall underlying external adjustment for those economies where external deficits exceed
levels warranted by fundamentals and desired policies.
 Monetary policy responses, more generally, to external pressures will depend on country
conditions and frameworks. Cyclical weakening calls for monetary policy easing, or less
tightening, for those economies where inflation and expectations are well anchored to
provide room for maneuver. Where still high inflationary pressures persist, including from
supply bottlenecks (e.g., Brazil, India, and Indonesia), the scope for easing the monetary
stance may be very limited or it may need to be tightened; and more efforts to better anchor
expectations may be required where strong nominal anchors are not well established.
 For countries with strong fiscal positions, fiscal policy, generally, should allow stabilizers to
work but avoid stimulus unless a major slowdown looms. Given room for policy maneuver
has tended to decline, in many of these countries, there is a broad need to rebuild buffers
over time. Gradual consolidation should continue in countries with large deficits and debt.
 With weaker growth prospects and potential problems from prolonged rapid credit growth,
the policy framework must be ready to handle possible further increases in financial
instability and risks to growth. Key instruments should include stronger regulatory oversight
and macroprudential policies, as a strong complement for prudent macroeconomic policies.


Global demand rebalancing. While global imbalances have narrowed last year, and, despite
some further progress, policies have played a relatively minor role. To foster rebalancing that is
supportive of growth, structural reforms that increase internal demand in surplus economies on
a sustained basis (in particular, private consumption in China and private investment in
Germany) and raise external competitiveness in deficit economies (e.g., Brazil, India, euro area
periphery, and the United Kingdom) remain necessary. More broadly speaking, to raise
productivity and employment, important structural reforms and full implementation of past
commitments in key areas (e.g., infrastructure investment, removal of entry barriers in product
and services markets) should be a priority for G-20 members.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

5

