GROUP OF TWENTY

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICY CHALLENGES
G-20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Meeting
September 20–21, 2014
Cairns, Australia

Prepared by Staff of the
I N T E R N A T I O N A L M O N E T A R Y F U N D*
*Does not necessarily reflect the views of the IMF Executive Board.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
An uneven global recovery continues, despite setbacks this year. Global growth in the first half of 2014
was weaker than expected in the April WEO. Disappointing growth largely reflects a surprisingly soft first
quarter in the United States, before negative one-off factors faded and activity picked up in Q2; but also
continuing weak performance in Latin America; downward surprises in the euro area, where activity stagnated
in the second quarter, and Japan, where output contracted more than expected following the VAT increase;
and weaker activity in Russia. In China, after a weaker-than-expected Q1, authorities took policy action to
support activity.
Alongside supportive central bank policies, financial conditions have continued easing over the last
few months. Sovereign bond yields have edged further down and equity prices have generally risen.
Sentiment toward emerging markets has improved, as reflected in resilient portfolio inflows and stable or
stronger currencies. Implied volatility measures fell to the very low levels prevailing before the May 2013
tapering remarks. This raises concerns that excessive risk taking may be building up, which could sharply
reverse in the run-up to U.S. rate hikes or should geopolitical events trigger higher risk aversion.
Looking forward, the global recovery should regain strength but downside risks have risen.
Exceptionally supportive financial conditions, moderating fiscal consolidation, and strengthening balance
sheets should support the recovery in the remainder of 2014 and into 2015. Global growth in 2014 would
remain below the April WEO forecast, however, reflecting the weaker first part of the year. Downside risks
have increased. Heightened geopolitical tensions and a sharp reversal of recent risk spread and volatility
compression pose new risks to growth, while other downside risks remain, including those related to U.S.
monetary policy normalization challenges, low inflation/deflation in some advanced economies, and, in the
medium run, the possibility of growth stagnation more broadly.
Policy priorities are as follows:



Advanced economies should continue accommodative monetary policies, given still large output gaps and
very low inflation. Reflecting the uneven recovery, challenges are becoming increasingly different across
major central banks. While monetary policy normalization will be coming to the forefront in the United
States, the euro area and Japan have to continue fighting low inflation. To mitigate financial stability risks
from a prolonged period of low interest rates and prevent premature monetary tightening, macroprudential tools should be the first line of defense. The pace and composition of fiscal adjustment should
also be better attuned to supporting the recovery and long-term growth.



In emerging economies, the focus of macroeconomic policies should remain on rebuilding buffers and
addressing vulnerabilities, in preparation for an environment characterized by higher interest rates and
tighter external financing conditions.



Decisive structural reforms are needed across G20 economies to boost potential output and help ensure
that growth is more sustainable. In a number of surplus countries, the focus should be on boosting
domestic demand or modifying its composition. In a number of deficit economies, including euro area
countries that switched to surplus recently, structural reform is needed to improve competitiveness.



Finally, infrastructure investment in economies with clearly identified needs and economic slack, current
conditions are favorable for increasing public infrastructure investment. However, while infrastructure
investment is needed to support economic development in some economies, efficiency of the investment
process and comfortable debt positions to mitigate the potential trade-off between higher output and
higher public-debt-to-GDP ratios are important to maximize the growth dividend.

__________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Prepared by a team from the IMF’s Research Department, led by Emil Stavrev, Florence Jaumotte, and Esteban Vesperoni, and including
David Wang, Eric Bang, Gabi Ionescu, and Inyoung Song.

DEVELOPMENTS, OUTLOOK, AND RISKS
An uneven global recovery continues, despite setbacks this year. Activity has regained momentum from
its weak start in 2014Q1, led by the United States and China, but overall performance in the first half of
the year was weaker than projected in the April WEO. With financial conditions exceptionally supportive
and fiscal consolidation moderating, the recovery is projected to continue, albeit at a moderate and

uneven pace. New downside risks associated with geopolitical tensions and increasing risk taking
are arising. Other risks stem from low inflation, secular stagnation in advanced economies, lower
growth in emerging economies, and the challenge of monetary policy normalization in the United
States, in particular the possibility of financial instability due to abrupt market corrections.
1.
Despite setbacks this year, global recovery is proceeding but remains unbalanced.
In many advanced economies, legacies of the boom and subsequent crisis—including high
private and public debt—still weigh on the recovery despite relaxed financial conditions.
Emerging markets continue adjusting to slower economic growth than both the pre-crisis boom
and the post-crisis recovery. New shocks, including heightened geopolitical uncertainty, have
also hit the global economy.
2.
Global activity has regained momentum in Q2, but it has been uneven and weaker
than expected in the April WEO. Growth rebounded in the U.S. but fell short of expectations in
the euro area and Japan. In emerging economies, growth accelerated in China, supported by
accommodative monetary and fiscal policies, with positive spillovers on other emerging Asian
economies, while weaker-than-expected domestic demand weighed on growth in many Latin
American countries. Following a soft patch in 2014Q1, exports growth regained momentum in
both advanced and emerging markets economies. More specifically:
Merchandise Exports

Global Manufacturing PMI

(percent; 3 month moving avg annualized)

(index; >50 = expansion; sa)
60

Advanced

Emerging

Advanced

80

Emerging

60

55

40

50

20
0

45

-20

40

-40

35

-60

Jul. 14

30

05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14
Source: IMF, Global Data Source.

Jun. 14

-80

05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14
Source: IMF, Global Data Source.

 Economic prospects are shifting in advanced economies.


2

In the United States, after a surprising decline in activity during the first quarter of 2014
(subsequently revised up), growth rebounded sharply in the second quarter. The rebound
reflected a swing in inventories, stronger private consumption and fixed investment, as

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

well as growth in state and local government spending. Job creation was also solid. While
exports have improved, net exports continue to be a drag on growth. Activity in the
housing sector remains sluggish.


In the euro area, economic activity stalled in the second quarter of 2014. Growth was
faster than expected in Spain, but weaker than expected elsewhere, notably in Germany
and Italy—where GDP contracted, and in France—where activity continued to be flat. In
Germany, the payback from one-off factors that supported growth in 2014Q1
(inventories, mild weather) likely played a role, but the outright decline in GDP indicates
that other factors have also put downward pressure on activity.



In Japan, the growth payback from one-off factors (VAT hike, emission taxes) that
boosted consumption and investment in the first quarter was greater than anticipated.
The outcome in the second quarter suggests that the strength in consumption observed
in the first quarter was mostly related to temporary factors, but there are tentative signs
of firming underlying momentum in investment.
Euro Area: PMI Composite New Orders

United States: Contributions to GDP

(50+=expansion; sa)
Euro Area
France
Italy

(q/q; saar)
Government
Exports
Investment

Imports
Inventories
Priv. Consumption

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4

Germany
Spain

65
60

55
50
45
40
Jul. 14
14

35
10
12Q1

12Q3

13Q1

Source: Haver Analytics.

13Q3

11

12

13

14Q1

Source: Haver Analytics.

 And the recovery has been unbalanced in emerging economies.


In China, accommodative policies implemented by
the government in response to the weak first
quarter supported faster growth in the second
quarter, including infrastructure investment and
private consumption. Exports also rebounded
from seasonal disruptions in the first quarter.
Some high frequency indicators suggest that the
growth momentum would carry into the second
half of the year.

EM Domestic Demand Indicators
PMI services (50+=expansion; sa; lhs)
Retail sales (yoy; rhs)

60

22

58

20

56

18

54

16

52

14

50

12

48

10

46



Elsewhere in emerging Asia, external demand has
recovered, aided by the growth rebound in China
and the United States, while domestic demand
should start picking up (e.g., Indonesia, India).

8
Jun. 14

44
07

08

09

10

11

12

13

6

14

Sources: IMF, Global Data Source; and Haver
Analytics.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

3

Growth in Latin America remains below trend, notably in Brazil, where activity contracted
in the second quarter as investment declined and consumption lost steam, but also
elsewhere. In Mexico, growth has been firming up in line with the U.S. rebound in the
second quarter.



3.
Financial conditions continued to ease, reflecting supportive central bank policies.
Valuations in virtually all major asset classes are stretched relative to past norms. Long-term
bond yields have declined further especially in the euro area but also in the United States and in
most emerging economies. Equity valuations have continued to edge higher, as investor
sentiment has remained positive despite mixed evidence on the strength of the recovery and
geopolitical tensions. Against this backdrop, capital flows into emerging economies have
remained positive, despite generally weaker activity, thus currencies and equity prices have
stabilized or strengthened in many of these economies since the April 2014 WEO. The effects of
geopolitical tensions with Russia/Ukraine, intensified conflicts in the MENA region, and the
Argentina default appear contained so far. However, implied volatilities across asset classes have
continued to decline, reaching levels prevailing before the Fed tapering talk. This raises concerns
of a buildup of excessive leverage and under-pricing of credit risk which could be abruptly
corrected in the run-up to U.S. rate hikes or because of higher global risk aversion.
Implied U.S. Interest Rate Volatility

Implied EM Exchange Rate Volatility

(basis points)

(basis points)

MOVE Index 1/

EM forex implied volatility

2013 average

130

20
Taper
talk

120

Non- Taper
Taper

110

Taper
talk

18

2013 average
Non- Taper
Taper

16

100

14

90
12
80
10

70

8

60

6

50
40
2011

9/4

2012

2013

2014

4
2011

9/4

2012

2013

2014

Sources: Bloomberg, L.P .; and IMF staff calculations.
1/ A weighted average index of the normalized implied volatility on 1 -month Treasury options (weights on 1-month
options for 2y, 5y, 10y and 30y instruments are 0.2, 0.2, 0.4, and 0.2, respectively).

4.
Looking forward, while the recovery is projected to regain some strength in the
remainder of 2014 and 2015, it would be weaker than foreseen in the spring. The key
drivers supporting the recovery identified in the July WEO update remain in place, including
moderating fiscal consolidation, highly accommodative monetary policy in most advanced
economies, and strengthening balance sheets. The global outlook for 2014 is weaker than in the
April WEO, on account of the investment weakness observed at the global level in the first half of
the year. Moreover, there are concerns that the sluggish recovery in the euro area may be
stalling.

4

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND



In advanced economies, growth is generally expected to strengthen in 2014–2015. An
exception is Japan, where the planned unwinding of the fiscal stimulus would leave growth
broadly unchanged in 2014 and 2015. The United States is expected to experience the
strongest rebound, and growth is also expected to remain solid in the United Kingdom,
Australia, Canada, and other Asian advanced economies. In the euro area, growth should
strengthen more gradually and unevenly as the crisis-legacy brakes ease only slowly.
Moderating fiscal consolidation, further monetary easing through near zero policy interest
rates and private asset purchase program by the ECB, and improving lending conditions,
including the sharp compression in spreads for stressed economies and record low longterm interest rates in core countries, should all support the recovery of the euro area.



In most emerging economies, growth is expected to increase moderately in the second half
of 2014 and into 2015, reflecting the waning of some temporary factors holding back growth
in the first half of this year, stronger demand from advanced economies, and still-favorable
global financial conditions. China’s growth, however, is projected to moderate slightly in
2015, as the economy transitions to a more sustainable path, and residential investment
slows further. The growth outlook for Latin America is likely to be marked down relative to
the April WEO for both 2014 and 2015: investment and consumption growth weakened in
Brazil largely owing to declining business and consumer confidence in the run up to the
elections, with some additional drag from lower growth in some trading partners; in Mexico,
after a weak first quarter, growth has picked up driven by robust external demand, and is
expected to remain strong in 2015 as the impact of structural reforms kick in; while in
Argentina, weak macroeconomic policies and policy uncertainties, including from the
situation with holdout creditors, are taking a toll on activity. In Russia, geopolitical tensions
are further undermining confidence, investment, and economic activity; the central bank has
raised its policy rates to contain increasing inflation pressure.

5.
Downside risks have increased as new ones have arisen and old ones remain. While
some of the crisis induced risks are fading, two new ones are rising: (i) increasing risk taking and
financial market optimism that could eventually trigger abrupt corrections, and (ii) geopolitical
risks. A faster-than-expected increase in U.S. interest rates and low inflation in some advanced
economies could also raise challenges going forward. In the medium run, key risks include
secular stagnation in advanced economies and disappointing potential growth in both advanced
and emerging economies.


Geopolitical tensions with Ukraine and Russia heightened through August and may increase
further as the effect of additional sanctions is felt. In addition to being a drag on economic
growth for the region and beyond, further unrest could also trigger large spillovers on
activity in other parts of the world, through a renewed bout of increased risk aversion in
global financial markets, higher public spending or revenue losses, or disruptions to
commodity markets, trade, and finance due to intensification of sanctions and
countersanctions. Moreover, even if there is no major escalation of the conflict, this may have
a significant impact on business confidence. Similarly, heightened geopolitical risks in the

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

5

Middle East could lead to disruption of oil production and a sharp rise in oil prices, with
negative spillovers to the global economy.




Risks to activity from low inflation remain relevant for the euro area and, to a lesser extent,
Japan. Inflation continues to undershoot and remain below central bank targets in many
advanced economies. In the euro area, in particular, inflation expectations have recently
drifted down. With policy rates in several cases close
HICP Inflation 1/
(year-over-year percent change)
to or at the zero bound, the room to lower rates is
Minimum
7
limited and negative shocks can lower inflation or
6
Maximum
expectations further or even push the economy into
5
Euro area
4
deflation, raising real rates, which would hamper the
3
recovery and increase debt burdens.
Sudden reversal of risk premia and volatility
compression in global financial markets due to
growth disappointments or other triggers. An
increase in global risk aversion can be associated
with a decline in U.S. long-term yields but still lead to
a significant tightening of global financial conditions,
capital flow reversals, and exchange rate pressures in
emerging markets, as well as negative effects on
equity prices.

2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4

Jul. 14
09

10

11

12

13

14

Source: IMF, Global Data Source.
1/ Figure reports euro area aggregate, and
maximum and minimum of euro area
economies.



As the recovery proceeds, there are risks related to the normalization of the U.S. (and U.K.)
monetary policy. The U.S. labor market has been strengthening more rapidly than forecast
and inflation has begun to rise (though it remains well below the Fed’s longer-term objective
of 2 percent), increasing the probability that monetary policy will need to be tightened faster
than previously envisaged or the risk of monetary surprises or sudden shifts in expectations
about the path of policy normalization. Against the backdrop of increased financial market
optimism—reflected in the compression of risk spreads and volatility indicators—such
surprises could trigger abrupt financial market corrections. As shown in the Annex, the source
of the tightening in financial conditions matters: better growth prospects in advanced
economies would have benign spillovers, despite the tightening of global financial
conditions, while a unexpected tightening unrelated to stronger growth in advanced
economies should have negative spillovers.



In the medium term, the risk of secular stagnation (a prolonged period of low growth and
weak demand) in the major advanced economies, especially the euro area and Japan, cannot
be ruled out. In the euro area, robust momentum has not yet emerged despite continued
very low interest rates and easing of brakes to the recovery, including from fiscal
consolidation and tight financial conditions. In turn, a protracted period of weak growth and
large negative output gaps can erode the growth potential of advanced economies, through
lower investment, R&D, and hysteresis effects of unemployment. Several years of slowing
growth prospects brings to the forefront the need for some emerging market economies to
tackle structural reforms to raise growth decisively in order to reduce the risk that potential

6

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

growth could disappoint further, especially given the risk of secular stagnation in advanced
markets mentioned above.

POLICIES TO BOOST GROWTH
Policy priorities center on supporting demand, while managing key risks, in the near term and
strengthening supply over time. Macroeconomic policies need to continue supporting the recovery
in advanced economies, given still large output gaps and very low inflation. Macro-prudential
policies are an important first line of defense to address potential financial stability threats
associated with too low for too long rates. In emerging economies, macroeconomic policies should
continue preparing for a new environment characterized by tighter external financial conditions.
Decisive structural reforms are needed for all countries to address the challenge of enhancing their
growth potential and in some, rebalancing the economy remains crucial to ensure sustainability of
growth in the medium term.

ADVANCED ECONOMIES NEED TO FIGHT LOW INFLATION AND SUSTAIN THE RECOVERY
6.
While monetary policy should continue supporting the recovery, challenges are
increasingly different across countries. With output gaps still large, and inflation running
below target, accommodative monetary conditions
Policy Rate Expectations 1/
remain essential for advanced economies, including in
(percent; months on x-axis)
the United States, to avoid cyclical impediments to
1.4
U.S.
Europe
U.K.
Japan
growth from becoming structural. However, given the
1.2
unevenness of the recovery across economies,
1.0
challenges faced by central banks are different. In the
0.8
United States and the United Kingdom, where the
0.6
recovery is stronger, the challenge is to manage exit
0.4
from exceptionally accommodative monetary policies as
0.2
output gaps shrink. In contrast, monetary policy in the
0.0
t
t+12
t+24
t+36
euro area and Japan is expected to remain more
accommodative for an extended period as they fight
Source: Bloomberg, L.P.
1/ As of August 6, 2014. Policy rate expectations
low inflation (euro area) or try to persistently raise
derived from Overnight Indexed Swaps (OIS), for
Euro area (EONIA rate), U.K. (SONIA rate), U.S.
inflation and inflation expectations (Japan). As some
(FED Funds rate), and Japan (TONAR rate).
start exiting UMP, well-calibrated communication and
cooperation will be key to avoid or manage bouts of financial market volatility. Specifically:


In the United States, the main challenge is to reach the appropriate speed of monetary
policy normalization, which is made difficult by uncertainties about the cyclical position and
monetary transmission. Current plans to end tapering later this year and increase policy
rates from the middle of next year appear appropriate, given the sizable slack. However, the
timing of the increase in policy rates may have to be adjusted in function of developments
on the inflation and unemployment fronts. The United Kingdom faces similar challenges:
while monetary policy should stay accommodative for now, it might, however, have to be

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

7

tightened quickly if costs run ahead of productivity growth or slack is absorbed, or
Tightening could also be considered if macroprudential tools prove insufficient to deal with
financial stability risks with due consideration to the tradeoffs involved vis-à-vis the real
economy.


In the euro area, the ECB’s recent actions—policy rate cuts in June and September, negative
deposit rates, targeted support for bank lending to non-financial corporates, and private
asset purchase program—and its willingness to do more, if necessary, have underlined its
commitment to raising inflation towards target. Given evidence that inflation expectations
are drifting down, the recent ECB’s measures are strongly welcomed and will substantially
expand its balance sheet and should reinforce its forward guidance to help counteract the
dangers posed by an extended period of low inflation. This should boost confidence,
improve private sector balance sheets, and help stimulate bank lending. Finally, to tackle
fragmentation, decisively mending banks’ balance sheets and completing the banking union
are critical. The ECB should continue to urge banks to be proactive in raising capital ahead
of the completion of the Asset Quality Review and associated stress tests.



In Japan, monetary policy has helped lift inflation and inflation expectations towards the
2-percent target. Given that the current aggressive pace of monetary easing may need to be
maintained for an extended period, providing more information about asset purchases
beyond end-2014 could further enhance transparency. In case actual or expected inflation
stagnate or growth disappoints, the Bank of Japan should act swiftly through further and/or
longer-dated asset purchases. There is also room to expand the Loan Support Program in
order to further enhance the monetary policy transmission. Finally, communication should
focus on the overarching goal of achieving the inflation target in a stable manner through a
more transparent presentation of the BoJ’s forecast and underlying assumptions.

7.

Financial stability risks related to a prolonged period of low interest rates bring macro-

prudential policies to the forefront. Excessive risk-taking may be building in some sectors (U.S.

corporate credit and insurance markets, housing price booms in a number of smaller advanced
economies) after more than five years of exceptionally low rates (see annex). Completing the
reform of financial regulation and deploying macro-prudential tools as a first line of defense, as
needed, are essential to limit financial risks. This will also reduce the risk of premature monetary
policy tightening not warranted by the cyclical position. It will also make systemic institutions
more resilient, help contain pro-cyclical asset price and credit dynamics, and cushion the
consequences of liquidity squeezes if volatility spikes.
8.

The pace and composition of fiscal adjustment should be attuned to supporting both

the recovery and long-term growth. Fiscal consolidation should continue to proceed gradually,

anchored in credible medium-term plans, which are still lacking in some countries (notably, in
Japan and the United States). At the same time, the design of fiscal policy should better support
the long-run growth potential of the economy, including by enhancing infrastructure investment,
provided that infrastructure needs have been identified, there is slack in the economy, monetary
policy is accommodative, investment processes are relatively efficient, and debt-to-GDP ratios
are not already high. Specifically:

8

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND



In the United States, reaching an agreement on a credible, medium-term consolidation plan
that puts debt on a downward trajectory should be a high priority. This should include steps
to contain health care costs, reform social security, and increase revenues. In the absence of
such a comprehensive agreement, efforts should still focus on identifying more modest
opportunities to relax the near term budget envelope, paid for with future fiscal savings. In
particular, frontloading infrastructure spending would be a good candidate, given the
urgent need to upgrade the quality of U.S. infrastructure. The United States should also
consider some changes to budget procedures to lessen fiscal policy uncertainty, including:
(i) reaching bipartisan agreement on a clear and simple medium-term fiscal objective, (ii) an
automatic process that raises the debt ceiling once agreement is reached on the broad
budget parameters, and (iii) a budget cycle where annual spending levels are agreed for a
two-year period.



In the euro area, the overall fiscal stance is broadly neutral, although a number of countries
are still tightening, even if at a slower pace. This strikes the right balance between demand
support and debt reduction. Nevertheless, Germany, which has completed its fiscal
consolidation, could afford to finance much-needed public investment in infrastructure,
without violating fiscal rules. Large negative growth surprises in euro area countries should
not trigger additional consolidation efforts, which would be self-defeating. Moreover, if
deflation risks materialize and monetary policy options are depleted, the escape clauses in
the fiscal framework may need to be used to respond in these circumstances.



In Japan, the second stage of the consumption tax increase should proceed with a uniform
rate (from 8 to 10 percent in October 2015). Concerns that it could harm low-income
households should be addressed through targeted subsidies instead of reducing tax rates
on essential items. The pace of fiscal withdrawal in 2014–15 is broadly appropriate, but a
concrete post-2015 fiscal consolidation plan remains urgently needed, which would allow
more near-term flexibility to respond to downside risks. Plans to lower the corporate tax rate
would likely have growth benefits, but would require offsetting fiscal measures to prevent a
further rise in fiscal risks.

EMERGING ECONOMIES HAVE TO ADAPT TO A CHANGING ENVIRONMENT
9.
The focus of macroeconomic policies should remain on addressing vulnerabilities
and rebuilding policy buffers. The strengthening of activity in advanced economies and
looming normalization of monetary policy in some implies that external financial conditions—
both availability of capital flows and borrowing costs—will eventually tighten. When risk
sentiment changes, having stronger macroeconomic fundamentals as well as the policy space
and credibility to react have proven to be critical to reduce volatility and negative spillovers (see
Annex). Exchange rate flexibility, alongside credible macroeconomic policies and frameworks, has
also proven to be an essential tool in coping with volatile capital flows.
10.
The appropriate course for policy to balance fostering growth and managing
vulnerabilities will be country-specific. Countries should continue to rebuild monetary and
fiscal policy space where it is limited—considering possible tradeoffs between building buffers

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

9

and slowing growth—and strengthen policy frameworks where their credibility has come into
question. Specifically:


In Brazil, slowing economic conditions will make it difficult to achieve the original budget
targets for 2014. Nevertheless, working towards meeting the official primary surplus target
with sustainable policies while continuing to wind down policy lending is important to put
gross public debt on a firmly downward path and boost market confidence. With inflation
still elevated, monetary tightening may have to be stepped up should inflation expectations
worsen.



In India, more efforts are needed to continue reducing stubbornly high inflation and the
large fiscal deficit. While the new government’s emphasis on continued fiscal consolidation is
welcome, the quality and durability of the consolidation remain of concern. The government
should articulate structural measures to underpin the consolidation path, including subsidy
reform and progress on the Goods and Services Tax. Sustainably lowering inflation will also
require further increases in the policy rate and a simpler monetary framework with clear
objectives and operational autonomy for the RBI.



In China, the challenge is to reduce the vulnerabilities accumulated through five years of
credit-fueled capital spending and transition to a more sustainable growth model (see
below). The implementation of the structural reforms in the authorities’ blueprint will help
reorient the economy in the medium term. However, additional measures are also needed in
the near term to contain risks, including a reduction in off-budget spending, further
reduction in credit growth, and slower investment growth. While finding the right mix
between reducing vulnerabilities and maintaining growth is an ongoing challenge,
addressing vulnerabilities more forcefully would put the economy on a safer and more
sustainable growth.



Some emerging economies (e.g., South Africa), that rely heavily on private external financing
should be ready to rapidly adjust policies if global financial conditions suddenly tightened.
For Turkey, policies should aim to re-establish a nominal anchor and tighten the fiscal stance,
while promoting national savings and competitiveness.

DECISIVE ACTION IS NEEDED BY ALL MEMBERS FOR STRONGER AND MORE BALANCED GROWTH
11.
A challenge for all is to strengthen their growth potential, for which structural
reforms will be critical. The G-20 has set the objective of raising collective output by at least 2
percent above the October 2013 WEO baseline over the coming five years. In addition, growth–
enhancing structural reform is particularly relevant over the medium term in emerging
economies that have experienced a gradual, protracted and broad based slowdown over the past
several years. Decisive actions are needed in various areas to achieve the membership’s objective:


10

In advanced economies with clearly identified infrastructure investment needs, economic
slack and policy rates are at the zero lower bound, relatively efficient public investment
processes, and manageable debt positions, current conditions are favorable for increasing
public infrastructure investment (e.g. Germany and the United States). In many emerging

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

economies, infrastructure investment is needed to ease supply bottlenecks (e.g. Brazil, India)
and support economic development. To maximize the growth dividend of public investment,
though, large output gaps, increased efficiency of the investment process and comfortable
debt positions are key.


Structural reforms to improve the functioning of product markets, specifically for nontradable sectors in surplus economies (Germany, Japan, and Korea), and more generally for
the whole economy in deficit countries, including euro area economies which recently
switched into surplus (e.g., Italy). To enhance productivity, easing limits on trade and
investment and improving business conditions (Indonesia, Russia, Turkey) would be
instrumental.



Labor market reforms are needed to raise participation of women and/or older workers in
advanced economies undergoing population aging (Germany, Japan, Korea, and the United
States) or where an important fraction of the population remains unemployed (South Africa).
Actions to increase labor demand and remove impediments to employment are also needed
in stressed euro area economies.

12.
Global current account imbalances have narrowed in 2013, but they are still larger
than desirable. Policy actions required to further narrow excessive imbalances vary but include
medium term fiscal consolidation, limiting financial excesses, and structural reforms to facilitate
adjustment in deficit economies. In some surplus economies, policies that support stronger
domestic demand would help, including moving toward more market-based exchange rates,
avoiding sustained, one-sided foreign exchange market policies, and reducing capital account
restrictions. Taken as a whole, policy actions are needed on both sides of excess imbalances, and
policy adjustments by all would be mutually supporting, with benefits in terms of growth and
reduction of financial risks.
13.
Thus, rebalancing global growth is an essential condition for its sustainability in the
medium term. While systemic risk associated with global imbalances has decreased, in many
countries external and internal rebalancing are essential to sustainable growth. In China,
steadfast implementation of the announced reform blueprint—especially through improving
financial intermediation, liberalizing the service sector, allowing more flexibility in the exchange
rate by reducing intervention over time, and strengthening the social safety net—will move the
economy to a more balanced and sustainable growth. To rebalance and boost its growth,
Germany needs to raise investment, both public infrastructure and private investment, and
continue with services sector liberalization. In a number of economies, adjusting their fiscal
position or improving competitiveness (France, South Africa) and removing supply bottlenecks
(Brazil, India, South Africa, and Turkey) would help improve the current account and lead to more
sustainable growth. While the gains from reform stem mostly from policies that countries need
to implement for their own good, joint action could produce beneficial growth and stability
spillovers in the longer term.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

11

ANNEX. SPILLOVERS FROM UNWINDING
MONETARY SUPPORT IN ADVANCED ECONOMIES
While unconventional monetary policy (UMP) has supported demand after the global crisis the
recent decline in market volatility and the low term premium point to risks going forward. A
prolonged period of low interest rates after the crisis had
Implied Volatility
(basis points)
created incentives to search for yield—increasing
Implied U.S. interest rate volatility
(MOVE index)
leverage and credit risk—and eventually prompted a 130
9/18/2013
5/22/2013
sharp market correction. Even though the episode was 120
temporary, it brought financial stability issues to the 110
forefront in the spring of 2013. In this context, the recent 100
90
fall in implied volatility in market trading to the very low
80
levels seen in early 2013, which were associated with one70
sided market positioning, carries risks. Moreover, even
60
after the adjustment during the taper episode, long-term
50
9/12
interest rates still look low compared with historical
40
10
11
12
13
14
levels. These two developments suggest that there are
Source: Bloomberg, L.P.
risks of abrupt market corrections going forward.
Against this background, with global financial conditions poised to tighten further as economic
prospects improve in advanced economies, there are potential spillovers from monetary policy
normalization. Spillovers will depend both on how well normalization is managed by major
central banks—i.e., whether it triggers sudden adjustments in asset prices and market volatility—
and on policy frameworks and fundamentals in recipient economies. Moreover, adverse
spillovers from UMP exit in advanced economies may be exacerbated by further slowdown in
emerging economies (EMs), which has been gradual so far, but protracted and synchronized in
nature.
The 2014 spillover report1 finds that the source of tightening financial conditions matters.
Tightening unrelated to or ahead of better growth prospects causes a significant co-movement
in long-term bond yields between source and recipient countries.2 As capital flows out of EMs,
currencies depreciate, stock prices fall, and industrial production declines. Tightening due to
better growth prospects in advanced economies implies a much lower co-movement of yields. In
this case, stronger external demand supports economic activity in EMs; and stock prices and
industrial production increase. Hence, better prospects in advanced economies have benign
spillovers, while unexpected financial tightening has a negative impact.

1

http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2014/062514.pdf

2

This could involve shocks to the term premium, shifts in portfolio preferences toward higher demand for cash
away from bonds and equity, and potential upward surprises in inflation unrelated to improved demand.

12

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

For recipient economies, spillover effects will likely differ across countries, depending on their
fundamentals and policy frameworks. Past experience suggests that economies with relatively
strong fundamentals—i.e., lower inflation, higher current account balances and reserves, and
deeper financial markets—can better mitigate spillovers from higher interest rates abroad. The
effects from these global shocks are milder in these economies, and credibility gives them more
policy space to respond to the shock itself.
Scenario analysis suggests that stronger than expected growth in advanced economies would
benefit global growth.3 Overall, better growth prospects in the United States and United
Kingdom compensate for the effects from the endogenous (in response to better growth) yield
increase. The policy response in recipient countries depends on the impact on external demand
and the initial conditions in the economy. The scenario suggests that GDP in the rest of the world
will be about 1½ percent higher cumulatively
Rest of the World - Real GDP Level
than in the baseline by 2019 (red line). While all
(percentage point deviation from baseline)
Term premium adjustment, low inflation and CAD
countries in the sample would experience a 0.8
Term premium adjustment, high inflation and CAD
Faster growth
positive demand shock, countries with the 0.6
strongest trade linkages with source countries 0.4
would benefit the most.
0.2
0.0

In contrast, a 100 basis points increase in the -0.2
term premium not associated with stronger -0.4
growth would tighten financial conditions and -0.6
have a negative impact on output. This scenario -0.8
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
assumes that an increase in the term premium
feeds into long-term bond yields in the United States and United Kingdom, although it is
partially counteracted by implementation of UMP in the Euro Area. Tighter global financial
conditions have a negative impact on growth. Overall, GDP in the rest of the world would be
about 0.6 percent lower cumulatively relative to the baseline by 2019. Recipient countries with
sound fundamentals—i.e., with the current account deficit and the inflation rate below the
median for EMs—have policy space to lower domestic interest rates and mitigate spillovers, and
their GDP would be only temporarily below the baseline (blue line). In contrast, countries with
relatively weak fundamentals experience a 2¼ percent cumulative GDP loss by 2019 (black line).
Misperception of policy intentions in source countries or an autonomous slowdown in EMs may
trigger larger spillover effects.4 Should market participants misperceive central banks’ policy
intentions—which could potentially bring about financial volatility and temporary disruptions in
short-term interest rates, as during the May 2013 taper episode—spillovers may be amplified, at
3

The scenario assumes stronger growth that triggers an endogenous monetary tightening of 100 basis points in
the policy rate.
4

The scenario assumes good central bank communication in advanced economies. Should market misinterpret
central bank policy intentions, spillovers from unwinding UMP could be amplified. The 2014 spillover report also
examines the interactions of bumpy monetary normalization with an autonomous EM slowdown.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

13

least initially. Moreover, a deceleration in EMs would exacerbate the global shock. Such a
downside scenario is analyzed in the spillover report, which concludes that GDP could fall at the
through by 1½–2 percent compared to the baseline.
The spillover report concludes that good communication in source countries and sound
fundamentals in recipient economies will be critical. Well-crafted communications could avoid
swings in asset prices or market misperceptions of policy intentions. Policy-makers should
explain trade-offs and strategies carefully, clarifying the role of financial stability considerations
on decision-making about policy rates and balance sheets. Sound fundamentals in recipient
economies can dampen the transmission of external shocks and increase credibility and space to
respond to them, especially through monetary policy. Letting the exchange rate adjust can act as
a helpful buffer. Where international reserves are adequate, intervening to avoid a disorderly
adjustment if macroeconomic policies fail to stabilize markets could be warranted.
At the international level, collaboration between advanced and emerging economies would help
manage spillovers and risks of spillbacks. Insuring against market turbulence through liquidity
lines, especially for more vulnerable economies, can limit the downside risks and possible wider
turmoil.

14

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

