       

                          

STRICTLY s

GROUP OF TWENTY

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICY CHALLENGES 
G-20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Meeting
September 4–5, 2015
Ankara, Turkey

Prepared by Staff of the
I N T E R N A T I O N A L M O N E T A R Y F U N D*
*Does not necessarily reflect the views of the IMF Executive Board.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Global growth remains moderate, reflecting a further slowdown in emerging economies and a weak recovery in
advanced economies. In an environment of rising financial market volatility, declining commodity prices,
weaker capital inflows, and depreciating emerging market currencies, downside risks to the outlook have risen,
particularly for emerging markets and developing economies.
Global growth in the first half of 2015 was lower than in the second half of 2014, reflecting a further
slowdown in emerging economies and a weaker recovery in advanced economies. In advanced
economies, weaker exports, partly reflecting temporary factors, and a slowdown in domestic demand were
key factors. Productivity growth has been persistently weak. In emerging economies, the slowdown reflects a
continuation of the adjustment after the investment and credit boom post-crisis, together with the fallout
from declining commodity prices, geopolitical tensions, and conflict in a number of countries. In advanced
economies, economic activity is projected to pick up modestly in the 2nd half of the year and into 2016. In
emerging economies growth this year is projected to slow again relative to 2014; some rebound is projected
next year, as conditions in distressed economies, while remaining difficult, are projected to improve.
Financial conditions for emerging economies have tightened. In an environment of rising financial market
volatility, dollar bond spreads and long-term local currency bond yields have increased relative to the spring,
stock prices have weakened, and capital inflows have declined. Emerging market currencies have generally
depreciated, reflecting weakening commodity prices, concerns about the growth transition in China, an
increase in risk aversion, and expectations of a lift-off in policy rates in the United States. In contrast, financial
conditions in advanced economies continue to be easy. On the back of weak demand, safe real interest rates
remain low, despite some widening of spreads, even as the policy rate lift-off approaches in the United
States.
Risks are tilted to the downside, and a simultaneous realization of some of these risks would imply a
much weaker outlook. Near-term downside risks for emerging economies have increased, given the
combination of China’s growth transition, lower commodity prices, potential adverse corporate balance sheet
and funding challenges related to a dollar appreciation, and capital flow reversals and disruptive asset price
shifts.
Strong mutual policy action is needed to raise growth and mitigate risks:



Advanced economies should maintain supportive policies. In most advanced economies substantial
output gaps and below-target inflation suggest that the monetary stance must stay accommodative.
Fiscal policy should remain growth friendly and be anchored in credible medium-term plans. Managing
high public debt in a low-growth and low-inflation environment remains a key challenge.



In many emerging economies, policy space to support growth remains limited. The commodity price
declines over the past year have alleviated inflation pressures and mitigated external vulnerabilities in net
commodity importers, but increased external and fiscal vulnerabilities in commodity exporters. Oil
exporters that have accumulated savings and have fiscal space can let fiscal deficits increase and allow a
more gradual adjustment of public spending. For floaters with less policy space, exchange rate flexibility
will be a critical buffer to the shock. This may require improving macroeconomic policy frameworks in
some countries and keeping balance sheet exposures manageable.



Decisive structural reforms are needed to raise potential output and productivity across the G-20
members. Labor market reforms in advanced economies undergoing population aging should aim at
raising labor participation, and actions to increase labor demand and remove impediments to
employment are also needed in euro area economies and some emerging markets. Reforms to improve
the functioning of product markets are also needed in Japan and the euro area, and reforms to improve
productivity and raise potential output are key in many emerging economies. Joint policy efforts by
deficit and surplus economies are needed to reduce excess imbalances while sustaining growth.

_______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Prepared by a team from the IMF’s Research Department, led by Emil Stavrev, Esteban Vesperoni, and Sweta Saxena and including
Eric Bang and Gabi Ionescu.

DEVELOPMENTS, OUTLOOK, AND RISKS
Global growth remains moderate, reflecting a further slowdown in emerging economies and a weak
recovery in advanced economies. Productivity growth in both advanced and emerging economies
continues to be low, suggesting that medium- and long-term common factors are also at play.
Financial conditions in advanced economies continue to be easy, but they have tightened for
emerging economies. In advanced economies economic activity is projected to pick up modestly this
and next year. In emerging economies, growth has slowed this year; some rebound is projected next
year, as the economic outlook in distressed economies, while remaining difficult, is projected to
improve. With declining commodity prices, depreciating emerging economy currencies, and rising
financial market volatility, downside risks have increased, and include disruptive asset price shifts
and financial turmoil, a further strengthening of the U.S. dollar, and lower growth in China.
1.
Uncertainty about emerging economies prospects has increased. The outlook in these
economies is being affected by more difficult external financial conditions. Financial market
volatility has risen sharply since early-August, with declining commodity prices and downward
pressure on many emerging economy currencies. And, China’s transition to a lower growth, while
broadly in line with forecasts, appears to have larger-than-previously-envisaged cross-border
repercussions, reflected in weakening commodity prices and stock prices.
2.
Global growth in the first half of 2015 declined relative to the second half of 2014,
reflecting a further slowdown in emerging markets and a weaker recovery in advanced
economies. Growth in global manufacturing, as measured by industrial production, slowed
markedly over the first half of 2015, as inventories built up in late 2014 and early 2015 and
investment growth slowed. World trade in volume terms contracted in the second quarter,
highlighting the failure of investment to pick up as expected, but also the trade spillovers of
China’s growth transition. In advanced economies, weaker exports, partly due to temporary
factors, and a slowdown in domestic demand were key factors. In emerging economies, the
slowdown reflects a continuation of the adjustment after the investment and credit boom postcrisis, together with the fallout from declining commodity prices, weakening exchange rates,
geopolitical tensions and conflict in a number of countries.
3.
In advanced economies, the pace of recovery has slowed amid protracted weakness
in productivity growth. Specifically:


In the United States, growth in the first half of the year was 1.8 percent, compared to
3.8 percent in the 2nd half of 2014. The growth slowdown reflected harsh winter weather, port
closures, and a strong downsizing of capital expenditure in the oil sector in Q1, and relatively
sluggish business investment in Q2. Recent revisions in the U.S. national accounts suggest
that productivity growth during 2012-14 was lower than previously thought.



In Japan, a strong rebound in Q1 was followed by a contraction of 1.6 percent (q-o-q, saar) in
Q2 due to a sharp fall in exports and private consumption, driven by the slowdown in
emerging markets and weak compensation growth, respectively.

2

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND



In the euro area, preliminary Q2 growth was somewhat weaker than expected, with a negative
surprise in Germany, and stronger-than-expected growth in Italy, Ireland, and Spain.
Preliminary data suggest that the weaker euro is having a positive impact on exports for
France and Germany, with net exports contributing positively to growth. In the United
Kingdom, the economy expanded at an annualized rate of 2¼ percent in the first half of 2015,
driven mainly by strong domestic demand.

4.
Growth in emerging economies has been slowing with marked differences across
countries and regions. The slowdown reflects the dampening impact of lower commodity prices
on commodity exporters and tighter external financial conditions—particularly in Latin America
and oil exporters, the rebalancing in China, and structural bottlenecks, as well as economic
distress related to geopolitical factors—particularly in the Commonwealth of Independent States
and some countries in the Middle East and North Africa.


In China, growth in the first half of 2015 was broadly in line with previous forecasts. Fueled by
a needed correction in residential real estate construction, investment slowed compared to
last year, but consumption growth remained steady. As import contracted, net exports
contributed positively to growth despite weaker-than-expected exports. Equity prices
dropped sharply in July after a one-year bull run, but the authorities intervened to stabilize
prices at lower levels.



In Russia, the recession continued in the second quarter, with GDP falling by 4.6 percent yearon-year. The decline in GDP over the first half of 2015 was somewhat larger than forecast,
reflecting the effects of lower oil prices and sanctions.



In Latin America, the downturn in Brazil was deeper than expected, as business and consumer
confidence continued to retreat amid deteriorating political conditions. With declining
commodity prices, momentum continued to weaken in other countries in the region. Growth
was also lower than expected in Mexico, reflecting slower U.S. growth but also lackluster
domestic demand.



In India, domestic demand is accelerating, underpinned by the large positive terms of trade
shock (mostly due to collapsing commodity-import prices).

5.
Financial conditions in advanced economies continue to be easy, but they have
tightened for emerging economies as financial market sentiment is deteriorating. In an
environment of weak demand, safe real interest rates remain low even as the policy rate lift-off
approaches in the United States. There have been temporary surges in volatility associated with
protracted program negotiations between Greece and its official creditors, the sharp stock market
decline in China despite significant intervention by the authorities, as well as the recent the
depreciation of the renminbi. Overall, financial conditions for emerging markets have tightened,
with dollar bond spreads and long-term local currency bond yields increasing by 40–50 basis
points on average since May, stock prices weakening, and exchange rates depreciating.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

3

7.
Exchange rates in emerging economies have come
under considerable pressure over the past weeks. Several
factors have likely contributed, including inter alia the sharp
drop in equity prices and the depreciation of the remimbi, with
the associated concerns about the extent of the growth
slowdown in China, and weaker commodity prices. Emerging
economy currencies have depreciated across the board, with
particularly strong depreciation pressures in commodity
exporters (Russia) and countries under stress (Brazil).

Commodity Prices
(January 1, 2014 = 100)
Metals
Crude oil 1/

120
100
80
60
40

8/26

20
Jan-14

Jul-14

Jan-15

Jul-15

Source: Bloomberg, L.P.
1/ Simple average of three spot prices; U.K. Brent,
West Texas Intermediate, and Dubai Fateh.

Nominal Effective Exchange Rate
4

(percent change from Jul. 2015 avg. to
Aug. 20, 2015)

2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-10
-12
-14
Euro
USA
ARG
DEU
ITL
JPN
SAU
FRA
GBR
AUS
CAN
IND
IDN
KOR
ZAF
CHN
MEX
BRA
TUR
RUS

6.
Commodity prices have weakened sharply. After
remaining broadly stable during the second quarter of 2015, oil
prices have resumed their decline in recent weeks, reflecting
resilient supply, a weakening in global demand, and the
prospects of higher future output following the Iran deal. Metal
prices have fallen on concerns about global demand, especially
the slowdown in commodity-intensive investment and
manufacturing activity in China, but also increases in supply (as
production has come on-stream reflecting the past investment
boom).

Source: IMF, Global Data Source.





4

Average Labor Productivity
(percent)
3

45 degree line

TWN

2
ESP

2008-2014

8.
Economic activity in advanced economies is
projected to pick up modestly this and next year. The
further decline in oil prices should provide some additional
boost, although the response of demand to the earlier decline
has so far been slightly weaker than expected. Unemployment
is declining but underlying productivity growth remains weak,
heightening concerns about the medium-term outlook:

1

0

HKG
AUS

KOR
IRL

USA

SGP

CAN
ISR
JPN
BEL
DEU

PRT
FRA SWE
GBR

ISL

FIN

In the United States, growth is expected to pick up further
LUX
GRC
-1
ITA
-1
0
1
2
3
4
in the second half of the year, supported by lower energy
1995-2007
Source: IMF staff calculations.
prices, the reduced fiscal drag, strengthened balance
sheets, and an improving housing market. These forces are expected to more than offset the
drag on net exports from the strengthening of the dollar. Longer-term growth prospects are
weaker, reflecting an aging population and low total factor productivity growth.
NOR

The moderate euro area recovery is projected to continue in 2015–16, sustained by lower oil
prices, monetary easing, and the euro depreciation. Growth is expected to pick up in
Germany, France, Italy, and especially in Spain. However, the outlook for Greece is more
difficult following the protracted period of uncertainty earlier in the year. In the United
Kingdom, continued steady growth is expected, supported by continued recovery of wage
growth and lower oil prices. Potential growth remains weak—a result of crisis legacies, but
also demographics and weak total factor productivity.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

5



In Japan, GDP growth is projected to rise gradually, following the 0.1 percent decline in 2014,
supported by higher real compensation, higher equity prices due to the Bank of Japan’s
additional quantitative and qualitative easing, and lower oil and commodity prices. Among
the other Asian advanced economies, growth will be generally weaker than in 2014, reflecting
domestic shocks and slower exports.

9.
The outlook for emerging economies has weakened in 2015 relative to last year. This
reflects inter alia weaker growth in commodity exporters—especially in Latin America—and a
slowdown in China. External conditions are becoming more difficult as the “pull” from advanced
economies remains modest and capital inflows have slowed. A rebound in activity in distressed
economies is expected to result in a pickup in growth in 2016, offsetting the projected
continuation of the slowdown in China. Specifically:


In China, growth is expected to decline as excesses in real estate, credit, and investment
continue to unwind, with a further moderation in investment growth, especially residential real
estate. Policy action will aim at reducing vulnerabilities from recent rapid credit and
investment growth, and not at fully offsetting the underlying moderation in activity. Ongoing
implementation of structural reforms and lower oil and commodity prices are expected to
expand consumer-oriented activities, partly buffering the slowdown.



In India, one of the world’s largest commodity importers, growth will benefit from recent
policy reforms, a consequent pickup in investment, and lower commodity prices. In Brazil,
weak business and consumer confidence amid difficult political conditions and the needed
tightening in the macroeconomic policy stance are expected to weaken domestic demand,
with investment declining particularly rapidly. In Russia, economic distress reflects the
interaction of falling oil prices and international sanctions with underlying structural
weaknesses. A contraction is expected to take place in both economies in 2015—with
significant regional spillovers—with activity remaining weak into 2016.



Lower oil prices will continue to take a toll on the outlook for oil exporters; where the negative
shock on terms of trade and real incomes will have an impact on medium term growth. Some
exporters—notably Saudi Arabia—are using their fiscal buffers, but policy space is more
limited in other countries (e.g., South Africa).

10.
The distribution of risks remains to the downside, and a simultaneous
materialization of some of these risks would imply a much weaker outlook. Near-term
downside risks to growth for emerging economies have increased, given the combination of risks
from China’s growth transition, lower commodity prices, adverse corporate balance sheet effects
and funding challenges related to dollar appreciation, and capital flow reversals.


Risks primarily affecting emerging economies include: (i) lower growth in China, either a
moderate slowdown as policies focus on reducing vulnerabilities rather than supporting
growth or a harder landing over the medium term, which would produce sizeable spillovers,
slowing global trade and putting additional downward pressure on commodity prices;
(ii) lower commodity prices, which would negatively affect commodity exporters; (iii) a further
sizeable strengthening of the U.S. dollar which could cause balance sheet and funding strains

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

5

for dollar debtors, offsetting trade benefits from real depreciation in some economies; and
(iv) increased corporate leverage and the associated high bank credit growth, particularly
foreign currency debts.


Disruptive asset price shifts and financial market turmoil remain a downside risk, which could
involve capital flow reversals in emerging economies. Several factors underpin this risk, notably
the still historically low term and risk premiums in bond markets, the changing context
underlying this asset price configuration (in particular, the gradual normalization of
accommodative monetary policies in the United States, as well as crisis legacies and deflation
risks), and the increased vulnerabilities and financial stability risks in emerging market
economies amid lower growth and declines in commodity prices. Financial market reaction to
the protracted uncertainties surrounding the negotiations for a new program with Greece was
limited, and risks have significantly diminished since the agreement on a new ESM program
for Greece. However, should program implementation falter due to political uncertainty or
reform fatigue in Greece, financial stress in the euro area could reemerge.



Potential output could be lower than expected in both advanced and emerging economies.
Capital stock growth could be lower for longer, reflecting crisis legacies in advanced
economies and structural constraints and less favorable external conditions for investment in
emerging economies.



The risk of secular stagnation for advanced economies and geopolitical risks for emerging
markets from ongoing events in Ukraine, the Middle East, and parts of Africa still remain
relevant.

POLICIES TO RAISE ACTUAL AND POTENTIAL GROWTH
Policy priorities have taken on more urgency compared to the February G-20 Surveillance Note.
Notably, raising actual and potential growth remains a key objective. In advanced economies,
accommodative monetary policy remains essential. Fiscal policy should be growth friendly, including
through increased infrastructure investment. In many emerging economies, macroeconomic policy
space to support growth is more limited, with inflation still above target in some economies, and
fiscal positions weaker than desirable in others. Structural reforms are needed to raise potential
output in both advanced and emerging economies. Joint efforts by deficit and surplus economies to
rebalance global demand would reduce excess external imbalances while sustaining growth.

POLICIES FOR FULL EMPLOYMENT AND STABLE INFLATION IN ADVANCED ECONOMIES
11.
Accommodative monetary policies remain essential in many advanced economies,
given still sizable output gaps. In most advanced economies, output gaps are still substantial,
inflation is expected to remain below target, and monetary policy remains constrained by the zero
lower bound. The expected boost in economic activity from lower oil prices has not materialized,
and lower energy costs are keeping inflation low. Hence, monetary policy must stay
accommodative to prevent real interest rates from rising prematurely.

6

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND



In the United States, the main near-term policy issue is the appropriate timing and pace of
monetary policy normalization. The Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC) decision
should remain data-dependent and with little evidence of meaningful wage and price
pressures so far, the normalization is expected to be gradual. An effective monetary policy
communication strategy will remain essential, also in light of differences between market and
FOMC expectations about the path of short-term interest rates.



In the euro area, the ECB’s expanded asset purchase program has improved confidence and
financial conditions, and raised inflation expectations initially. More recently however, inflation
expectations have reversed, and the euro has strengthened, which could put downward
pressure on prices. Hence, the program should be extended if there is not sufficient
improvement in inflation consistent with meeting medium-term price stability objectives.
These monetary policy efforts should be supported by measures to strengthen bank balance
sheets, which would help to improve monetary policy transmission and credit market
conditions. Stricter regulation of nonperforming loans and measures to improve insolvency
and foreclosure procedures are a priority in this regard.



In Japan, accelerating structural reforms is critical to boost confidence and contribute to
higher domestic demand and favorable wage-price dynamics. In this context, the Bank of
Japan should stand ready for further easing. It should also consider providing stronger
guidance to markets by moving to more forecast-oriented monetary policy communication to
increase the transparency of its assessment of inflation prospects and strengthen the signal of
its commitment to the inflation target.

12.
Fiscal policy should be growth friendly. Managing high public debt in a low-growth
and low-inflation environment remains a key challenge in many economies. Fiscal consolidation
should remain growth friendly and be anchored in credible medium term plans. In the United
States, the priority remains to agree on a medium-term fiscal consolidation plan, including higher
tax revenue. In the euro area, countries should adhere to their commitments under the Stability
and Growth Pact (SGP), but those with fiscal space, notably Germany, could do more to encourage
growth, especially by undertaking much-needed public infrastructure investment and supporting
structural reforms. Growth-friendly fiscal rebalancing could include lower marginal taxes on labor
and capital financed by cuts to unproductive spending or base-broadening measures. In Japan, a
credible medium-term strategy for fiscal adjustment with specific measures is urgently needed,
given high public debt ratios.
13.
Structural reforms are essential to boost potential output and productivity. After six
years of demand weakness, the likelihood of damage to potential output is increasingly a concern.
Hence, continued support to demand should be accompanied by structural reforms, with
particular emphasis on measures that would support demand in the short term. Labor market
reforms could strengthen both labor force participation and trend employment by removing tax
disincentives (Japan, United States) and improving family benefits such as childcare assistance
(United States)/improving child care (Japan). In the euro area, better targeted training programs
and active labor market policies could address concerns about skill erosion. Structural reforms to

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

7

improve the functioning of product markets are needed in Japan (the third arrow of Abenomics)
and euro area countries.

POLICIES TO ADDRESS CHALLENGES IN EMERGING ECONOMIES
14.
Policymakers in many emerging economies face a growth slowdown accompanied
by a more challenging environment. On the external front, financial conditions have tightened,
commodity prices have declined sharply, and exchange rates have been under pressure. On the
domestic front, macroeconomic policy space remains limited as several economies have
experienced inflation above target or/and weaker fiscal positions than before the crisis. External
and financial vulnerabilities have risen, and could be exacerbated if capital flow reversals
materialize, as private sector leverage has increased significantly, and current account positions
have deteriorated. Finally, lack of credibility, notably where inflation is above target, complicates
the monetary policy response as exchange rate depreciation could feed into inflation expectations
and lead to a worsening inflation outlook.
15.
Emerging market economies need to strike an appropriate balance between
fostering growth and managing vulnerabilities. In many net commodity importers, lower
commodity prices have alleviated inflation pressure and reduced external vulnerabilities. The
tradeoff between supporting demand and reducing vulnerabilities has become less pronounced
as a result. Policy space, though, has declined as a number of central banks have already reduced
interest rates over the past year. In some commodity importers, the terms of trade and real
income gains from lower oil prices have been used to increase public sector savings and
strengthen fiscal positions. In commodity exporters, fiscal positions have deteriorated and external
and fiscal vulnerabilities have increased. The urgency to adjust policies to lower commodity prices
depends on the buffers accumulated in the past. Where policy space is limited, allowing
substantial exchange rate depreciation will be critical. Policies across economies include:


In China, the policy priority is achieving a smooth transition to more sustainable patterns of
growth, while containing vulnerabilities. The recent sharp equity market corrections should
not discourage the authorities from continuing with reforms to give market mechanisms a
more decisive role in the economy, eliminate distortions, and strengthen institutions. The new
mechanism for determining the central parity of the renminbi appears a welcome step
towards achieving an effectively floating exchange rate system in the next couple of years.



In India, while near-term growth prospects remain favorable and external vulnerabilities have
decreased, some macroeconomic imbalances remain. While the faster-than-expected fall in
inflation has created space for considering modest cuts in the nominal policy rate, mediumterm inflationary pressures and upside risks to inflation remain. With balance sheet strains in
the corporate and banking sectors, financial sector regulation should be enhanced,
provisioning increased, and debt recovery strengthened.



Structural reforms to raise sustainable growth differ across countries. They include removing
infrastructure bottlenecks in the power sector (India, Indonesia, South Africa); easing limits on
trade and investment and improving business conditions (Brazil, Indonesia, Russia); and
implementing reforms to education, labor, and product markets to raise competitiveness and

8

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

productivity (Brazil, China, India, South Africa) and government services delivery (South Africa).
In India, the post-election recovery of confidence and lower oil prices offer an opportunity to
pursue much-needed structural reforms.
16.
Joint policy actions by both deficit and surplus economies are needed to reduce
excess imbalances while sustaining growth. After narrowing modestly in 2013, the global
current account imbalances held steady at 3½ percent of world GDP in 2014. Over the last several
years the composition of current
Global Current Account Imbalances
(percent of World GDP)
U.S.
CHN
DEU
JPN
EUR Deficit
account imbalances has changed—the
EUR Surplus
EMA
OIL
ROW
Discrepancy
4
large deficits of the United States and 3
the surpluses of China and oil exporting 2
1
countries have more than halved, while 0
the current account surplus in the euro -1
-2
area has increased. Overall, there has -3
05
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
13
14
Source: IMF staff estimates.
been little progress in reducing excess
Note: Oil exporters = Algeria, Angola, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bolivia, Brunei Darussalam, Chad, Republic of Congo, Ecuador,
Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Iran, Iraq, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Libya, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia, South
imbalances. Thus, joint policy action by
Sudan, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkmenistan, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela, Yemen; Other Asia = Hong Kong
SAR, India, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan Province of China, Thailand. European economies
(excluding Germany and Norway) are sorted into surplus or deficit each year by the sings (positive or negative, respectively) of
both surplus and deficit economies is
their current account balances.
needed to reduce excess imbalances
while supporting growth. Actions in debtor economies include medium-term fiscal consolidation
and structural reforms to improve competitiveness and facilitate adjustment. In creditor
economies, policies should support stronger domestic demand, including through infrastructure
investment (Germany) or focus on rebalancing toward consumption, while preventing too sharp a
slowdown, including by moving toward more market-based exchange rates, and reducing capital
account restrictions (China).

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

9

