       

 
GROUP OF TWENTY

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICY CHALLENGES  
G-20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors’ Meetings
July 23–24, 2016
Chengdu, China

Prepared by Staff of the
I N T E R N A T I O N A L M O N E T A R Y F U N D*
*Does not necessarily reflect the views of the IMF Executive Board.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
“Brexit” marks the materialization of an important downside risk to global growth. The global
outlook, set for a small upward revision prior to the U.K.’s referendum, has been revised downward
modestly for 2016 and 2017, reflecting the expected macroeconomic consequences of a sizable increase
in economic, political, and institutional uncertainty. But with “Brexit” still very much unfolding, more
negative outcomes are a distinct possibility.
This setback comes against a background of already weak underlying growth caused by a
combination of persistent and interlinked forces. These include: (i) the pre-crisis trend of slowing total
factor productivity growth, compounded by population aging; (ii) the crisis legacy of debt overhang in
advanced economies and rising corporate leverage and pockets of excess capacity in emerging economies;
and (iii) the scarring of productive capacity, following the crisis, caused by persistent low investment and
high unemployment. Not only is growth low, in many cases it has also been shared unequally. This can
create more challenges by undermining support for reform as well as for openness to trade and migration.
Downside risks have become more salient, pointing to the critical importance of strong policies.
Failure to achieve clarity about the future relationship between the U.K. and the European Union (E.U.)
would add to uncertainty and weigh on confidence. This short-term risk could be severely heightened by
a lack of decisive action to address the weakness in underlying growth. And, if not managed well, China’s
transition could further raise volatility around the baseline path of the global economy. Against this
background, insufficient rebuilding of policy buffers and tackling of corporate and financial weaknesses in
emerging economies would leave them highly vulnerable to shocks.
A broad-based policy effort is urgent to contain risk and reinvigorate growth both in the short and
the longer term, including:



Reducing uncertainty around “Brexit” and its repercussions. A smooth and predictable transition to a
new relationship between the U.K. and E.U. that as much as possible preserves gains from trade is
essential. While uncertainty about the outcome of negotiations remains, policymakers should stand
ready to act decisively should financial market turbulence threaten the global outlook.



Implementing effective macroeconomic support. Where demand is still falling short, this requires a
broad-based approach that exploits policy synergies by combining structural and balance sheet
reforms with continued monetary support and growth-friendly fiscal policies—including using
available fiscal space, anchored by strong policy frameworks. Stronger domestic demand support,
especially in creditor countries with policy space, would also help reduce external imbalances.



Addressing debt overhangs. In many advanced economies, balance sheet repair remains critical to
lift investment, contain vulnerabilities, and improve monetary transmission. Addressing corporate
debt and other financial risks is also important in a number of emerging economies, and a key
ingredient of China’s transition to a new growth model. In some cases, this might require the use
of public sector resources.



Lifting long-term growth and making it more inclusive. The G-20 can lead by encouraging strong
implementation of the G-20 growth strategies, and prioritizing structural reforms that have a high
short-term growth impact.



Strengthening multilateral action. Reinvigorating trade integration remains crucial to boost global
growth, as is making sure that the gains from trade are shared widely. And it remains important
to strengthen global safety nets, including by monitoring geopolitical spillovers that could
threaten the global recovery.

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Prepared by a team from the IMF’s Research Department led by Helge Berger, and including Florence Jaumotte, Eric Bang and Sung
Eun Jung.

RECENT DEVELOPMENTS, OUTLOOK AND RISKS
Global growth remains weak and fragile, and “Brexit” marks the materialization of an important
downside risk for the world economy. Growth is already being held back by a combination of persistent,
interlinked forces—including unfavorable pre-crisis productivity trends, the legacy of high private and
sovereign debt, and hysteresis problems. It could be even lower if the current increases in economic and
political uncertainty continue and the attendant financial market repercussions take a toll on confidence.
This possibility adds to downside risks from insufficient policy efforts to raise the trajectory of global
growth, while managing emerging market transitions and vulnerabilities. Strong global growth will not
return without decisive policy action.
1.
Even before the “Brexit” shock, global growth had been lackluster. The euro area started
the year with stronger-than-expected momentum, helped by higher investment. However, the level
of underlying growth remained weak, and inflation—now projected at just 0.2 percent in 2016—was
still uncomfortably low. At the same time, first quarter GDP growth in the United States, at 1.1 percent,
saar, was about half of what had been predicted, though a rebound is foreseen in the second quarter.
In Japan, the preliminary estimates of first quarter growth suggested a modest rebound, but it
remained very weak and headline inflation turned negative again. And, while emerging economies data
pointed to somewhat better outcomes in the first part of the year, much of it was driven by renewed
policy support in China—support that comes with further credit expansion and even higher corporate
debt. Commodity prices have risen recently but remain low overall and continue to strain large
economies such as Brazil, Russia, and Saudi Arabia.
United States: Contributions to GDP Growth
(q/q; saar)

Global Manufacturing PMI
(index; >50 = expansion; sa)
55

Advanced

Emerging

54
53
52
51
50
49
48
Jun. 16
47
Jan-13
Jan-14
Jan-15
Jan-16
Source: IMF, Global Data Source.

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4

Government
Exports
Investment
Real GDP

12Q1
13Q1
14Q1
Source: Haver Analytics.

Imports
Inventories
Priv. Consumption

15Q1

16Q1

2.
Financial volatility increased following the “Brexit” vote. Financial and oil markets had
started recovering around mid-February, together with a modest recovery in capital flows to emerging
markets in the first quarter. Following the British referendum, however, financial markets reacted with
a strong global flight from risk, forcing particularly sharp price declines in equities across the world,
especially for European banks, and declining yields on safe assets. The pound plummeted while the

2

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

yen and the U.S. dollar strengthened on safe haven flows. These adjustments reflected a downgrade
to the growth outlook and uncertainty about the terms of the U.K.’s exit from the European Union.
While the initial financial market reaction was severe, it was generally orderly. Since then, markets
have stabilized and broad equity measures have recovered. However, financial sector stocks remain
significantly lower than before the “Brexit” referendum, especially in Europe, and currency shifts
continue.
Major Currencies vs Dollar

Financial Market Volatility

240

(indexed to June 23, 2016)

(index; January 1, 2014=100)
VIX
G7 FX volatility
Emerging market FX volatility

108

Yen

Euro

Sterling

DXY 1/

104

200

100

160

96

120

92

80

88

40
Jan-14 Jul-14

7/15
Jan-15 Jul-15

Jan-16 Jul-16

Source: Bloomberg, L.P.

84
6/23

6/28

7/03

7/06

7/12

7/15

Source: Bloomberg, L.P.
1/ DXY index indicates the general international
value of the dollar by averaging the exchange rates
between the USD and major world currencies.

Stock Market Index

Stock Market Index

(January 1, 2016 = 100)

(percent change from June 23 to June 27, 2016)
Overall

stronger local currency

Banking

0

120
115
110

-5

105

S&P 500 Index
EURO STOXX 50
FTSE 250 1/
Nikkei 225
Emerging

100

-10

95

-15

90
85

-20

80

-25
S&P 500 EURO FTSE 100 Nikkei Emerging
Index STOXX
/1
225
markets
50
Source: Bloomberg, L.P.
1/ Excluding HSBC Holdings plc.

7/15
75
Jan-16
Mar-16
May-16
Jul-16
Source: Bloomberg, L.P.
1/ Capitalization-weighted index of the 250
most highly capitalized companies, outside of
the FTSE 100, traded on the London Stock
Exchange.

3.
These developments have added to the weakness of the outlook. Prior to the “Brexit”
shock, the world economy seemed primed for a small improvement, reflecting primarily the upside
surprises in first quarter growth in the euro area and Japan, and in emerging economies due to policy
support in China and improved confidence and terms of trade in Brazil and Russia. As a result of the

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

3

outcome of the U.K. vote, however, the global outlook for 2016–2017 has been revised downwards
modestly, reflecting the expected macroeconomic consequences of a substantial increase in
economic, political, and institutional uncertainty, especially in advanced European economies. The July
2016 update of the Word Economic Outlook (WEO) foresees growth at 3.1 percent in 2016 and 3.4
percent in 2017—lower by 0.1 percentage points than in the April projections in both years.1 The
modest downward revisions reflect benign assumptions of a gradual reduction in uncertainty going
forward, with arrangements between the E.U. and the U.K. avoiding a large increase in economic
barriers, no major financial disruption, and limited political fallout from the referendum. More negative
outcomes are a distinct possibility.
4.
In advanced economies, the recovery will continue to be modest, reflecting the continuing
weakness in underlying growth and persistent uncertainty related to the outcome of the U.K.
referendum. U.S. growth is forecast to be 2.2 percent in 2016 and 2.5 percent in 2017—down by 0.2
percentage points in 2016 relative to the April WEO, reflecting further dollar appreciation and weaker
global demand, and subdued non-residential investment. In the euro area, activity is expected to grow
at 1.6 percent and 1.4 percent respectively in 2016 and 2017, as support from low oil prices, the ECB
policies and a broadly neutral fiscal stance partly offset the immediate impact of uncertainty and weak
confidence related to spillovers from “Brexit.” Delays in tackling legacy issues in the banking sector
pose downside risks to the forecast. In the U.K., the large negative demand shock and heightened
uncertainty will lead to a significant slowdown. Growth in Japan is expected to remain weak at 0.3
percent this year and 0.1 percent next year, reflecting anemic consumption growth, lackluster
investment, and the effects of the appreciating yen on net exports. There is, however, upside risk to
this forecast from fiscal support expected to be provided by a supplementary budget for 2017.
5.
In emerging economies, growth prospects remain muted in historical perspective, due
to the slowdown and rebalancing in China, low commodity prices, and distress in some large emerging
market economies. In China, the government again resorted to boosting credit and infrastructure
spending, supporting near-term growth but further raising vulnerabilities. As a result, the economy is
expected to continue to grow strongly this year, at 6.6 percent, exceeding the IMF’s recommended
range of 6–6½ percent, before slowing to 6.2 percent in 2017. India’s economy is on a recovery path,
helped by lower oil prices, positive policy actions and improved confidence. Growth is projected at
7.4 percent in both FY2016/17 and FY2017/18. But headwinds from weaknesses in India’s corporate
and bank balance sheets, a decelerating pace of reforms, and sluggish exports will weigh on growth.
Finally, conditions in Brazil and Russia are starting to improve gradually, with a return to positive
growth expected for 2017.
6.
A number of persistent and interlinked problems explains the disappointing underlying
growth performance. There are indications that productivity growth in advanced economies already
weakened before the global financial crisis. However, the crisis and the consequent sluggish global
recovery have added further headwinds, including high levels of (first) private and (then) sovereign
debt, chronic investment deficiency, and skill erosion from prolonged high levels of unemployment,
1

4

IMF, World Economic Outlook July 2016 Update.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

with demographics adding further downward pressure. All these forces, and negative feedback loops
between them, are reflected in stubbornly weak investment, which has been the Achilles heel of the
recovery. More specifically, the factors at work include:
G20 Labor Productivity Growth 1/

Gross Capital Formation

(percent; GDP-weighted; 5y moving average)
5
4

Advanced 2/
Emerging ex. China 2/
China (rhs)

13
11

3

9

2

7

1

5

0

3

-1

1
95 97 99 01 03 05 07 09 11 13 15
Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook; and IMF
staff calculations.
1/ Excludes EU and Saudi Arabia.
2/ GDP-weighted using fixed weights.

(percent of GDP)
World
50
Advanced
Emerging ex. China
45
China
40
35
30
25
20
15
70 75 80 85 90 95 00 05 10 15
Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook.



Productivity trends: Empirical evidence suggests that potential growth in advanced economies had
started to decline before the crisis, and, along with labor productivity, total factor productivity has
been increasing at only modest rates across all major advanced economies. In part this may have
reflected the fading impact of the ICT revolution. For example, G-20 advanced economies’ average
labor productivity growth fell from around 1.8 percent for 1990–99 to just below 1 percent for
2010–15. Moreover, the weakness of total factor productivity growth is compounded by the
slowdown (or even decline) in labor input linked to population aging. In emerging markets,
potential growth has suffered in the aftermath of the crisis on account of slowing total factor
productivity growth, partly due to infrastructure bottlenecks.



Crisis legacies: In a number of euro area countries, impaired banks’ balance sheets and the need
to reduce high levels of debt—public, corporate, or household—continue to weigh on demand
and growth. In emerging markets, going forward, increased private sector debt levels could have
similar effects. And excess capacity in some sectors could cloud the outlook.



Post-crisis problems: An extended period of low growth (such as in the euro area and Japan)
reflecting persistently weak private demand can turn into lasting stagnation when the scarring of
productive capacity from low investment and employment reduces potential growth. This comes
at a time when in key advanced economies, interest rates even at longer maturities have already
fallen to very low, or even negative levels.



Negative feedback loops: Expectations of low growth lead to weak investment which, in turn, feeds
even lower growth—both in the short and (via the scarring or hysteresis effects just described) in
the longer term. This feedback loop can be reinforced by high levels of debt, as the need to
deleverage will reduce demand and growth, which will ultimately slow the reduction of debt. In

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

5

the euro area and Japan, these impediments could be compounded further by protracted low
inflation.
7.
The fact that income is not only growing more slowly but is also shared less equally
creates additional challenges. Measures of within-country income inequality, such as Gini
coefficients and the income shares of top earners, have been on the rise since the early 1980s. At the
same time, the share of produced income that accrues to workers has been on a declining trend in
many advanced and emerging economies. This is a potentially significant development in a slow
growth context when overall income might not rise fast enough to offset the declining labor income
share, resulting in weakly growing or stagnating incomes for many. This dynamic opens the door to
another negative feedback loop in which disappointing income growth can reduce the political
support for certain necessary structural reforms or foster inward-looking policies on trade and
migration—which will further diminish the outlook for long-term growth. In addition, inequality might
impact short-term demand, as the propensity to consume out of income tends to be higher for the
less well-off.
8.
Reflecting, in part, the different growth paths
Real Effective Exchange Rates
(index; Jan. 2013 = 100; cpi-based)
of the larger advanced economies, external
U.S.
U.K.
imbalances have widened moderately again. In 2015, 135
Japan
Euro area
while the U.S. current account deficit increased, amid the
China
125
relatively stronger U.S. outlook and the associated steep
appreciation of the dollar, surpluses in Japan and the 115
euro area grew, reflecting generally more subdued 105
domestic demand and currency depreciation. In the
95
United States, the gains from better commodity terms of
trade were more than offset by a decline in net exports, 85
Jul-16
further widening the deficit. In the euro area, while net 75
Jan-13
Jan-14
Jan-15
Jan-16
exports worsened in real terms, the positive terms-ofSource:
IMF,
Global
Data
Source.
trade shock led to an improvement in the current
account. For 2015, the U.S. external position was
“moderately weaker” than fundamentals while Japan’s external position has moved to “moderately
stronger” than fundamentals.2 There was little adjustment among the larger surplus countries (e.g.,
Germany, Korea), whose external positions remained “substantially stronger” than fundamentals. The
widening imbalances in systemic economies during 2015 were largely offset by falling surpluses in
large oil exporters as well as smaller deficits in vulnerable emerging markets and some euro area
countries. Although market conditions remain fluid following the U.K. referendum, currency
movements since early 2016 helped partially to reverse some of the trends observed last year—with
sterling weakening, and the yen strengthening. The current account implications remain uncertain,
and will likely depend on how the U.K.’s transition out of the E.U. is managed and on what new
arrangements are adopted.

2

6

IMF, 2016 External Sector Report.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

9.
The lack of progress on current accounts rebalancing is likely to lead to a further
widening of stock imbalances and associated risks. Under current policies, this would likely lead to
a further widening of imbalances in net foreign asset positions, with larger debtor positions (for
instance, in the United States), rising creditor positions (in Japan and Germany), and still large negative
net international investment positions (in countries like Spain and Turkey). Risks from large negative
exposures are well-known, but ever-increasing creditor positions could also raise concerns, in
particular valuation and default risks of holding assets from increasingly indebted countries.
10.
Downside risks to the global growth outlook have increased significantly following the
“Brexit” vote. An important risk at the current juncture is an unnecessarily long period of political
and economic uncertainty surrounding the U.K.’s exit from the European Union and the deterioration
of financial conditions in some countries. This outcome could have severe macroeconomic
repercussions, with advanced economies (particularly Europe) likely to be hit harder, including
through the intensification of bank distress in vulnerable economies. Heightened uncertainty also
makes it more likely that unforeseen negative shocks translate into global disruptions. That possibility
adds to persistent downside risks inextricably linked to the poor longer-term prospects for the global
economy. Specifically:


Policymakers may not do enough to prop up growth in the short and long term. This could extend
the already protracted period of stubbornly weak growth in advanced economies (e.g., in the euro
area), which might be reinforced by negative feedback loops, including a surge in inward-looking
policies.



The continuing economic transition in China could add volatility around the baseline—for example
because of an abrupt adjustment if unsustainable policies are maintained for too long, or owing
to financial market uncertainties surrounding policy intentions.



There is also a risk that emerging economies do not reduce vulnerabilities and rebuild buffers
sufficiently before capital flow reversals materialize. Corporate leverage has increased significantly
in emerging economies (e.g., Brazil, India, and Turkey), in domestic and foreign currency, against
the background of ample global liquidity. A strong pullback of capital flows to emerging
economies could tighten financial conditions and weaken their currencies, with the possibility of
significant adverse corporate balance sheet effects and funding challenges, and significant
repercussions for banking systems.



Finally, risks of noneconomic origin also remain salient. Political divisions within advanced
economies may hamper efforts to tackle important challenges, such as the long-standing
structural problems and the refugee problem; and a shift toward protectionist policies is a distinct
threat. Other ongoing concerns include geopolitical tensions, domestic armed strife, terrorism,
climate related factors (e.g., the drought in East and Southern Africa), and diseases such as the
Zika virus afflicting the Latin America and Caribbean region.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

7

AN URGENT AND BROAD-BASED POLICY EFFORT
To lift growth and counter risks, G-20 policymakers will need to follow a broad-based approach that
simultaneously provides better-balanced demand support where needed, addresses private sector
balance sheet issues, and implements structural reforms. In emerging economies, the priority should be
to rebuild policy buffers and implement sustainable macro policies.

A MORE POTENT MACRO-ECONOMIC POLICY MIX
11.
Reducing uncertainties surrounding “Brexit” would help reduce the risk of a protracted
tightening of financial conditions. It will be important to have clarity on the process and objectives
that will guide discussions between the U.K. and the E.U. Of primary importance is a smooth and
predictable transition to a new set of post-exit trading and financial relationships that as much as
possible preserves gains from trade. Where required and feasible, more supportive macroeconomic
policies can reduce the short-term impact on growth. Policymakers should stand ready to act more
aggressively should the impact of financial market turbulence and higher uncertainty threaten to
materially weaken the global outlook. In the euro area, policymakers should work together to
demonstrate their continuing commitment to the E.U. and the monetary union including by agreeing
on a common policy response to the refugee surge and securing external borders. Over the medium
run, priority should be given to completing the banking union, strengthening the single market, and
moving closer to a fiscal union.
12.
Short-term demand support still has an important part to play in advanced economies,
but needs greater emphasis on growth-friendly fiscal policies. In a majority of advanced countries,
output gaps remain negative, weak labor markets threaten to permanently scar especially the young
in the workforce, and inflation is low and far off target. Where monetary policy is becoming overburdened, domestic policy coordination can help to make macroeconomic support effective. This
requires a broad-based approach combining all available policy tools and strong policy frameworks,
which anchor fiscal and monetary policy in the long run while allowing for effective demand
management in the short run. Specifically:


Monetary policy. Central banks should continue to use all available instruments to raise inflation,
including negative interest rates, where appropriate, while carefully monitoring the potential
impact on banks, pension funds and insurance companies as well as market functioning. In the
United States, Federal Reserve policy should remain data dependent. There is a clear case for the
Fed to proceed along a very gradual upward path for the fed funds rate, conscious of global
disinflationary trends and confirming along the way that wage and price inflation are indeed
maintaining their steady upward momentum.



Fiscal policy. Where monetary policy space is narrowing and there is fiscal space, fiscal policy can
help support demand and close output gaps—including through measures that will strengthen
growth also in the medium and long term (e.g., Canada, Korea) or, where necessary, facilitate
balance sheet repair. In most countries, it will be important to adjust expenditure priorities to

8

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

finance reforms that increase potential output (e.g., Germany). For the euro area, the use of
centralized investment funds to support infrastructure investment in countries without fiscal space
would be appropriate. A coordinated use of fiscal space would be beneficial should the global
outlook weaken materially.


Income policies. Such policies can play a useful role in some countries—for example, in Japan,
ambitious policies such as incentivizing profitable companies to raise wages through a “comply
or explain” mechanism and raising administratively controlled wages are a priority to spur wageprice dynamics and raise inflation. In the United States, combining a further expansion of the
Earned Income Tax Credit with a raise in the federal minimum wage, as well as upgrading social
programs for the non-working poor will help reduce poverty. A more progressive personal income
tax could help mitigate income polarization and assist the working poor.



Policy frameworks. Strong fiscal frameworks that ensure sustainability over the longer term,
coupled with fiscal reforms, help increase or safeguard policy space in the short run (e.g., United
States, Japan). In the United States, achieving a sustained downward medium-term path for public
debt would require a comprehensive reform of the tax system, pension reform, and further
healthcare cost containment. In Japan, the pre-announcement of a gradual path of consumption
tax hikes is needed. In the euro area, the priority is to make full use of the flexibility within existing
rules. In the medium term, stricter enforcement and simplifying the Stability and Growth Pact will
make it more effective. There is also a strong case for expanding centralized fiscal support.

13.
To avoid the risk of a hard landing and lower their exposure to capital flow reversals,
emerging economies should rebuild policy buffers. In China, macro policies need to be adjusted
for a moderate slowdown, allowing growth to settle at a sustainable level. This requires slowing credit
expansion and switching from off-budget investment to more on-budget, pro-consumption
measures. Strengthening transparency, especially in communicating policy objectives and enhancing
data quality, will be key to minimize spillovers and financial volatility. In Brazil, the room for monetary
policy easing is limited by underlying inflationary pressures and fiscal consolidation should continue
to reduce large deficits. The new government should complement the proposed cap on federal
noninterest spending with tax measures and address spending rigidities and unsustainable mandates,
including in the pension system. The quality of fiscal consolidation in India should be improved
through a comprehensive tax reform (such as introducing the goods and services tax and improving
tax administration) and measures to further reduce subsidies. With shrinking fiscal buffers, many
commodity exporters need to develop new growth models and tackle fiscal adjustment, including
through reduced but more efficient public expenditures, stronger fiscal frameworks, and mobilizing
new sources of revenues. Exchange rate flexibility can usefully cushion the impact of adverse external
shocks, provided that the effects of currency depreciations on balance sheets and domestic inflation
rates are contained. Even as vulnerabilities are addressed, emerging economies can continue to be a
strong locomotive of global economic and trade growth through well-sequenced structural reforms
that provide near-term demand support.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

9

ADDRESSING THE DEBT OVERHANG
14.
Tackling quickly and decisively remaining financial sector vulnerabilities is key to ensure
resilience in periods of uncertainty and to lift investment. This is particularly relevant in many
advanced economies, and especially in Europe. In the aftermath of “Brexit,” major European banks
have seen large losses in their equity values, probably reflecting the continent’s still vulnerable
banking systems. Bank balance sheet repair has been slow and high levels of nonperforming loans
continue to undermine bank profitability and constrain new lending in many countries in Europe’s
periphery. Many European countries also suffer from “overbanking,” which points to a need for further
consolidation, restructuring, or the exit of nonviable banks. A comprehensive approach to accelerating
the resolution of nonperforming loans (NPLs) is needed to help raise bank profitability, stimulate
lending, and facilitate consolidation. It should include: stricter supervision, with more conservative
provisioning and collateral valuation, capital surcharges, and aggressive time-bound NPL disposal
targets; stronger and harmonized household and corporate insolvency frameworks, including shorter
court procedures and out-of-court arrangements; and development of distressed debt markets to
facilitate NPL disposals. In some cases, this might require the use of public sector resources.
15.
In China, the transition to a more sustainable growth requires addressing the corporate
debt problem while improving resource allocation and guarding against financial risks. Creditfueled growth has resulted in a substantial increase of the corporate debt-to-GDP ratio by about 50
percentage points after the global financial crisis, while corporate fundamentals, such as debtservicing capacity and profits are weakening against a backdrop of excess capacity, moderating
domestic demand, weak external demand, and declining producer prices. A comprehensive plan and
concrete action that entail restructuring or resolving weak firms are needed, requiring banks to
recognize proactively and manage impaired assets, hardening budget constraints, facilitating market
entry in services (such as telecom, utilities, and health care), and providing government assistance to
handle costs of structural unemployment and worker dislocation. Actions are also required to guard
against financial risks by boosting bank buffers, reining in shadow bank/product risks, dampening
pockets of excessive housing price growth, and improving the supervisory framework.
16.
More generally, emerging economies will have to address corporate and financial
vulnerabilities in preparation for an eventual rise in interest rates in advanced economies. The
strong increase in corporate debt of nonfinancial firms across major emerging market economies and
associated rising foreign currency exposures raise concerns because historically, many financial crises
in emerging markets have been preceded by rapid leverage growth, which made these economies
highly vulnerable to a rise in interest rates, dollar appreciation, and an increase in global risk aversion.
It is critical to address possible vulnerabilities now. Required measures include monitoring vulnerable
and systemically important firms, as well as banks and other sectors closely linked to them, and taking
action where needed, including—where appropriate and available—the use of public resources.
Policymakers should also limit a further buildup of foreign currency balance sheet exposures and
contain excessive increases in corporate leverage, through the use of macro- and micro-prudential
policies such as, for instance, higher capital requirements for foreign exchange exposures and caps
on the share of such exposures on banks’ balance sheets. Finally, corporate insolvency regimes need

10

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

to be strengthened in preparation for a higher future incidence of corporate failures as borrowing
costs normalize.

STRENGTHENING LONG-TERM GROWTH
17.
Given the challenges to long-term growth, the G-20 needs to step up its push for
structural reforms. This year, under the Chinese presidency, the G-20 has enhanced its focus on
structural reforms, by identifying critical reform areas and elaborating guiding principles. Countries
are now working to update their growth strategies ahead of the Hangzhou Summit in September
2016. While reaching the G-20’s original goal of increasing GDP by 2.1 percent by 2018 will be difficult,
enhanced implementation of countries’ reform commitments is essential to support near-term growth
and increase potential over the longer term. Where possible, measures should also be taken to
address any adverse impacts such reforms may have on inclusiveness.
18.
Recent IMF work suggests that structural reforms are most effective when carefully
prioritized and sequenced, based on each country’s position in the business cycle and its policy
space (see Annex). Research on advanced economies shows that, while product market reforms tend
to raise investment in the short as well as the medium term, the short-term impact of certain labor
market reforms varies with cyclical conditions. For example, reductions in labor tax wedges and
increases in public spending on active labor market policies have larger effects during periods of weak
demand, in part because they usually entail some degree of fiscal stimulus. In contrast, reforms to
employment protection arrangements and unemployment benefit systems, where they are excessive,
have positive effects in good times but can exacerbate conditions during periods of slack. In some
cases, structural reforms particularly critical for medium-term growth will have to be implemented as
soon as feasible.
19.
Reforms in advanced economies can boost labor force participation and productivity,
while making growth more inclusive. For instance:


In the United States, expanding infrastructure investment and addressing the skills gap through
better education and training would bolster productivity growth. At the same time, combining a
further expansion of the Earned Income Tax Credit with a raise in the federal minimum wage, as
well as an upgrading of social programs for the non-working poor would enhance the
inclusiveness of growth. Together with specific trade-related programs, many of these policies can
also help to ease adjustment to more open international trade.



The euro area should prioritize product and labor market reforms, especially those that support
near-term demand, including reducing business entry barriers in the retail and professional
services sectors, improving public administration and insolvency regimes, integrating women,
refugees, long-term unemployed and older workers into the labor force, and shrinking the labor
tax wedge. In addition, reforms that complete the single market in services, energy, digital
commerce and transport should be implemented as they would also promote infrastructure
investment.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

11



In Japan, easing product market regulations will boost economic activity in the short-term.
Harmonizing job protection will enhance long-term productivity growth and reduce inequality.
Fostering the labor force participation of women and foreigners will help to address the
demographic overhang.

20.
Emerging economies should focus on efficient public investment, as well as product and
labor market reforms to improve their business environment. For example, China should pursue
its plans to liberalize the economy further, while disentangling the still-pervasive web of market
distortions. In particular, bolder reforms of state-owned enterprises (SOE), such as imposing hard
budget constraints and opening up the SOE-dominated services sector to competition, are needed.
In India, further steps to relax long-standing supply bottlenecks (especially in the energy, mining, and
power sectors) as well as labor market reforms, are crucial to achieving faster and more inclusive
growth. In Brazil, structural reforms to raise productivity and competitiveness, along with strong
implementation of the infrastructure concessions program, are essential for boosting potential
growth. In commodity exporters more generally, it is important to plan for and invest in new sectors
and activities so as to diversify the economy. In many cases, emerging economies’ growth could
receive an important boost by opening up domestic sectors, including in services, to foreign capital
and technology.
21.
The right policies will also help to reduce external imbalances. More fiscal stimulus in
advanced surplus economies with fiscal space, continuing monetary support and growth-friendly fiscal
rebalancing in deficit economies, and structural reforms would contribute to external rebalancing. For
instance, streamlining service or product sector regulations in surplus economies (e.g., in Japan, Korea,
and Germany) will encourage domestic demand and relative price adjustments. Facilitating
diversification and expansion of the non-commodity sector (in Brazil, Saudi Arabia and South Africa),
and further labor market reform (e.g., in France, Spain, and South Africa) would boost productivity and
competitiveness in economies with external positions weaker than fundamentals.

STRENGTHENING MULTILATERAL ACTION
22.
Reinvigorating trade integration is a key component of the global policy agenda to
boost growth. The pace of new trade policy initiatives at the global level has slowed notably. At the
same time, new restrictions imposed since the global financial crisis have begun to weigh on global
trade. Trade policy’s new frontiers such as services, regulatory cooperation, and policies toward FDI
can bolster efficiency and productivity through greater investment, technology transfer, and
integration into global value chains. Regulatory and other “frontier” trade matters are mostly
negotiated outside the multilateral trading system, in a collection of bilateral and regional agreements
that may lack coherence. With governments differing on whether to continue the World Trade
Organization (WTO) Doha Round, there is an urgent need to identify a path forward for the global
trading system and to begin to integrate into the WTO the many positive steps—e.g., in services, ecommerce, investment, and regulatory cooperation—currently being taken outside it.
23.
In the wake of heightened political risk, policymakers should revive the spirit of
multilateralism and globalization, notably by ensuring the gains from globalization are shared

12

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

widely. This means paying urgent attention to enhancing the gains of globalization, limiting its costs,
taking mitigating measures for affected workers and making a positive case for integration to skeptical
parts of the public. This will require the use of fiscal resources, for example for training, as well as a
clear and persuasive communication strategy.
24.
Finally, multilateral efforts must also be made to strengthen the resilience of the global
system in the face of shocks. These include:


Further enhancing the global financial safety net. The risks from possible capital flow reversals
would likely have spillovers on the global economy given the high interconnectedness of the
international financial system. There is a case to design new financing mechanisms, for instance
to address the risks faced by emerging markets with strong fundamentals but high vulnerability
to spillovers. The Fund is also preparing a review of countries’ experiences in addressing
macroeconomic and financial stability risks associated with volatile capital flows, including
through macroprudential and capital flow management policies.



Completing and implementing the global regulatory reform agenda. Both advanced economies and
emerging market economies should continue to strengthen the regulation and supervision of
rapidly expanding financial activities outside the banking system. Further implementation of
agreed frameworks to resolve global systemically important banks and progress toward a
framework for central counter parties would address key gaps in the foundation of a sound
international financial architecture.



Addressing possible geopolitical spillovers that could threaten the global recovery. Refugee flows
triggered by geopolitical conflicts, and global epidemics initially affect some countries and
regions, but, if left unchecked, could have significant spillover effects on the global economy. In
such instances, a coordinated worldwide initiative to provide financial support to countries at the
center of such shocks may be warranted.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

13

Table 1. Real GDP Growth
(percent change)
Year over Year
Projections

Deviations

(from Jul. 2016)

(from Apr. 2016)

2014

2015

2016

2017

2016

2017

World 1/
Advanced economies
Euro area
Emerging market and developing countries 2/
Advanced G-20
Emerging G-20

3.4
1.9
0.9
4.6
1.8
5.2

3.1
1.9
1.7
4.0
1.9
4.6

3.1
1.8
1.6
4.1
1.7
4.6

3.4
1.8
1.4
4.6
1.8
5.0

-0.1
-0.1
0.1
0.0
-0.1
0.1

-0.1
-0.2
-0.2
0.0
-0.1
0.0

G-20 3/
Argentina 4/
Australia
Brazil
Canada
China
France
Germany
India
Indonesia
Italy
Japan
Korea
Mexico
Russia
Saudi Arabia
South Africa
Spain 5/
Turkey
United Kingdom
United States
European Union

3.6
0.5
2.7
0.1
2.5
7.3
0.6
1.6
7.2
5.0
-0.3
0.0
3.3
2.2
0.7
3.6
1.6
1.4
3.0
3.1
2.4
1.6

3.3
2.1
2.5
-3.8
1.1
6.9
1.3
1.5
7.6
4.8
0.8
0.5
2.6
2.5
-3.7
3.5
1.3
3.2
4.0
2.2
2.4
2.0

3.3
-1.5
2.8
-3.3
1.4
6.6
1.5
1.6
7.4
4.9
0.9
0.3
2.7
2.5
-1.2
1.2
0.1
2.6
3.8
1.7
2.2
1.9

3.6
2.1
2.8
0.5
2.1
6.2
1.2
1.2
7.4
5.3
1.0
0.1
3.0
2.6
1.0
2.0
1.0
2.1
3.2
1.3
2.5
1.6

0.0
-0.5
0.3
0.5
-0.1
0.1
0.4
0.1
-0.1
0.0
-0.1
-0.2
0.0
0.1
0.6
0.0
-0.5
0.0
0.0
-0.2
-0.2
0.1

0.0
-0.7
-0.2
0.5
0.2
0.0
-0.1
-0.4
-0.1
0.0
-0.1
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.2
0.1
-0.2
-0.2
-0.2
-0.9
0.0
-0.3

Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook April 2016; and July 2016 Update.
1/ The quarterly estimates and projections account for 90 percent of the world purchasing-power-parity weights.
2/ The quarterly estimates and projections account for approximately 80 percent of the emerging market and developing countries.
3/ G-20 aggregations exclude European Union.
4/ The GDP data for Argentina before 2015 reflect official data, while for 2015 the data reflect IMF staff estimates. On February 1, 2013, the
IMF issued a declaration of censure, and in June 2015 called on Argentina to implement additional specified actions to address the quality of
its official GDP data according to a specified timetable. The new government that took office in December 2015 reviewed the methodology
underlying the system of national accounts and released a new GDP series on June 29, 2016. The Managing Director will report to the
Executive Board on this issue again by July 15, 2016, and the Executive Board will review the issue in line with IMF procedures at the end of
August 2016.
5/ Permanent invitee.

 

14

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

Annex. Priorities for Structural Reforms in G-20 Countries3
Structural reforms remain a critical element of a broad-based approach to bolster growth. G-20 countries
need to step up the implementation of their G-20 growth strategies, and prioritize structural reforms
with a high short-term impact on growth. Structural reforms are most effective when they reflect an
economy’s structural policy gaps, its level of development, its position in the economic cycle, and its
available policy space to support reforms.
Given the complex interplay of supply and demand policies, the prioritization of structural
reforms needs to be based on macroeconomic considerations. The larger a country’s output gap,
the more it should prioritize structural reforms that will support growth in the short term and the
longer term—such as product market deregulation, given their positive pay-off even under weak
macroeconomic conditions, and infrastructure investment, given the larger fiscal multipliers in times
of economic slack (as well as the lower borrowing costs).
Macroeconomic support can help make reforms more effective. Where the short-term effect of
reforms depends on the state of the business cycle, such support can enhance their impact. With the
scope of monetary policy limited in many advanced economies at the zero lower bound, and given
currency pressures and financial stability considerations in emerging economies, growth-friendly fiscal
policy can play an important role. This is particularly important in cases where there are structural
reforms that are so critical for medium-term growth that they should be implemented as soon as
feasible.
Where reforms come with fiscal costs but budget constraints are binding, the sequencing of
reforms might have to be adjusted to favor lower- or no-cost measures with positive demand effects
of their own, or budget-neutral reform packages. In contrast, where there is fiscal space, available
resources should be used to offset any short-term costs of growth-friendly structural reforms. Fiscal
space can also be enhanced by the elaboration of medium-term fiscal plans, which can bolster
confidence in the long-term objectives of fiscal policy.
Macroeconomic policy space differs considerably across the G-20. Within the G-20, some
countries (like Canada and Korea) appear to have a reasonable degree of fiscal space to support
structural reforms that increase potential output, based on indicators like public sector financing costs,
the profile of public debt, and future financing needs. Other countries (such as Brazil and Italy) will
need to advance fiscal consolidation, targeting to the extent possible growth-friendly adjustment
measures, given their relatively high debt burden.
Some structural reforms may themselves help to generate policy space—though it can depend
on underlying economic conditions. New IMF staff analysis on advanced economies finds that past
product market deregulation boosted output sufficiently to reduce the debt-to-GDP ratio by about 4
percentage points on average, after five years. While job protection reforms were not found to affect
the public debt-to-GDP ratio on average, they increased it when carried out at times of major slack,
and lowered it during times of robust growth.
With nearly all G-20 economies at below-potential output, the IMF is recommending measures
that both boost near-term growth and raise potential growth over the long run.


In advanced economies, these measures include shifting the composition of public spending
toward infrastructure investment (e.g., Australia, Canada, Germany, U.S.), and promoting product
and labor market, fiscal, and other reforms. Product market deregulation (particularly in services

3

This annex is a summary of a staff background paper for the G-20 Surveillance Note, “Priorities for Structural Reforms
in G-20 Countries.”

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

15

and network industries) is recommended in many countries (Australia, Canada, Germany, Japan,
Korea, Italy), and especially where policy space is more limited as this will not generate budgetary
costs in the short run. Further policy action is required to ensure a successful integration into the
labor market of some groups with lower participation rates, such as women, refugees, and older
workers (Canada, Germany, Japan, Korea, U.K., U.S.) and better match vocational training to market
demand (Canada, U.K., U.S.). In Korea —where fiscal space is available—expanding benefits for
non-regular workers and lowering employment protection for regular workers is desirable when
paired with fiscal support. A comprehensive skills-based immigration reform would have large
effects on labor supply (U.S.). On the fiscal side, tax simplification and broadening measures can
reduce inefficiencies, raising revenues to finance other high-payoff reforms (e.g., U.K., U.S.). Overall
social spending reforms (e.g., France) and reforming the pension and health systems to contain
future aging-related costs (U.K., U.S.) would help ensure fiscal sustainability and create space to
support other high-payoff reforms. Other reform priorities include, for example, a more ambitious
reform of the banking sector and the judiciary system to improve credit flow (Italy).


Recommendations for emerging market economies focus on raising public investment
efficiency (India, Saudi Arabia, South Africa) and product and labor market reforms. They also
address trade and FDI impediments, governance of public institutions, and other institutional
reforms. Where fiscal space is limited or consolidation is necessary, governments are encouraged
to adjust the composition of fiscal policy to make it more growth-friendly. Promoting market entry
and competition is highlighted (China, Saudi Arabia, South Africa), and in some cases, would give
a quick boost to investment and productivity within tighter budgetary constraints particularly if
done in conjunction with easing barriers to trade and FDI (Brazil, India, Indonesia). Advice on labor
market reforms is focused on improving market flexibility (Indonesia, South Africa), and reducing
skill mismatches through education and vocational training (Indonesia, Russia, Saudi Arabia, South
Africa, Turkey). Institutional and regulatory reforms can provide foundational support to other
reform initiatives. Priorities include strengthening SOE governance (China and South Africa) and
hardening budget constraints (China). Implementing further subsidy and social spending reforms
would create policy space to support other supply-side reforms (Argentina, China, India, Mexico,
Russia). Areas also being emphasized include improving security, the rule of law, and the judiciary
system (Mexico, Turkey, Russia) and strengthening the frameworks for public-private sector
dispute settlement (Russia) and contract enforcement (India, Mexico, Saudi Arabia, South Africa).



Some commodity exporting emerging economies (Brazil, Russia, Saudi Arabia, South Africa) are
facing acute challenges, given a steep and protracted decline in commodity prices. These
countries are performing significantly below potential and need to rebuild fiscal buffers. Reform
strategies advocated by the Fund are targeted at supporting short-term growth and
diversification, with more weight put on product market and legal reforms to improve the business
climate and private investment; trade and FDI liberalization to help with diversification and ease
balance of payments pressures; and financial deepening to facilitate credit flows.



As important complements to reforms that bolster growth, IMF recommendations also aim
to promote inclusiveness and macroeconomic resilience. To promote inclusiveness, Fund staff
recommends a carefully targeted expansion of social spending toward vulnerable groups in
Mexico, social spending for the elderly poor in Korea, and the upgrading of social programs for
the nonworking poor in the United States. Recommendations to bolster macrofinancial resilience
include expanding the housing supply (U.K.), resolving the corporate debt overhang (China,
Korea), coordinating a national approach to regulating and supervising life insurers (U.S.), and
reforming monetary frameworks (Argentina and China).

16

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

