While macroeconomic policy settings are broadly in line with countries’ short-term needs, IMF policy
advice points to areas for improvement in the policy mix across the G-20 membership. On the one hand,
in some advanced economies additional fiscal support would be helpful to help close output gaps further,
raise potential growth, and advance external rebalancing. On the other hand, medium-term fiscal
consolidation should be more ambitious in many countries with high public debt. Structural adjustment
should continue in emerging markets, including many commodity exporters. In most G-20 countries,
there is a need for ambitious additional structural reforms to sustain growth in the medium term.

To safeguard the current growth momentum, the macroeconomic policy mix should be
adjusted to changing circumstances. Following the IMF’s Article IV policy advice, countries with
negative output gaps which have fiscal space should support growth with all available tools, while
those with closed output gaps should withdraw short-term fiscal stimulus and calibrate monetary
policy to inflation developments.7 In some advanced economies that have fiscal space and are
operating at or close to capacity, additional spending could boost potential growth and create positive
transitional spillovers for others.8 Where fiscal space is a constraint—for example because of
particularly high levels of public debt or other concerns—consolidation efforts should be gradual and
as growth-friendly as possible. Many countries would benefit from a more growth-friendly budget
composition. In countries facing too-low growth and too-high inflation, macroeconomic policies will
have to weigh possible trade-offs. Emerging economies still adjusting to the lower commodity price
environment should avoid expansionary fiscal policies and focus on fostering longer-term adjustment
instead.

Fiscal policy in advanced economies remains broadly in line with countries’ short-term
needs, but additional support would be helpful in some countries. For example, in Korea, where
cyclical shortfalls remain, there is still a case for larger-than-planned fiscal support. Japan, should avoid
a premature drop in the level of fiscal support. There is scope for additional fiscal support in Germany,
including by means of higher public investment: the latter would not only raise the country’s potential
output, but also contribute to lower the excess current account surplus and help lift growth in other
euro area countries, notably where economic slack persists and fiscal policy is constrained. In
economies with smaller or already closed output gaps and an increased focus on fiscal sustainability,
fiscal support is, accordingly, expected to be withdrawn sooner (for example, in the United States and
the United Kingdom). In the medium term, most countries will appropriately turn to consolidation,
given elevated public debt levels (see also the discussion in the section below).

Implementing the proposed adjustments to the policy mix would also contribute to
more sustainable growth. At least three effects are at work. First, where fiscal policy directly supports
infrastructure investment (for example, Germany), it will raise productivity and the growth potential in
the future, enhancing sustainability. Second, additional short-term demand support from fiscal policies
where output gaps are negative can accelerate the benefits of certain structural reforms, such as 
measures that raise labor supply, which are particularly relevant for European G-20 members but also
several emerging economies (see next section). Finally, to the extent that fiscal and monetary policies
are adjusted to make growth more balanced and reduce vulnerabilities, they will also decrease the risk
of crisis, and thereby, make growth more lasting and sustainable.
