While approaches have differed, major central banks have acted effectively to
support economic activity and credit creation. Most major advanced economy central
banks have reduced policy interest rates to close to the zero interest floor. The Fed has
signaled that interest rates are likely to remain low for an extended period, while other major
central banks have indicated that monetary policy would only be tightened once the
macroeconomic environment improves and the outlook for inflation picks up. Central banks
have also used a range of instruments, tailored to the circumstances of their economies, to
support financial intermediation and encourage credit flows.
There is evidence that forceful monetary easing, alongside enhanced credit and
liquidity support, has helped ease financial stress (Figure 3). Notwithstanding conceptual
difficulties in gauging effectiveness, central bank actions (as well as public interventions)
have improved the functioning of money, foreign exchange, and commercial paper markets. 6
Libor-OIS spreads have declined sharply, reflecting increased liquidity and lower credit
risk. Nonetheless, they still remain wider than their pre-crisis levels, partly signifying the
limits of central bank liquidity operations. Term repo rates have declined in major advanced
economies, as a result of both policy rate cuts and central bank operations that aided the
functioning of repo markets. Foreign exchange swap and forward markets have also
improved, as a result of the Fed’s Term Auction Facility (TAF), central bank currency swap
arrangements, and effectively unlimited funding from the ECB (up to 1 year) which has
reduced European bank demand for dollar funding. Commercial paper rates are falling in
advanced economies, driven in part by major central banks’ direct purchases and liquidity
operations targeted at short-term corporate financing.
In emerging economies, there remains scope to cut policy rates if needed to
support demand, but rising asset prices and a vigorous turnaround in economic
activity suggest that policy tightening may be needed in some countries. In China, the
monetary expansion has quickly fed through to the domestic economy and there may be a
need to tighten credit conditions in the face of sharply rising credit growth and the potential
for overinvestment. Following substantial easing in the first half of 2009, several emerging
economies (including in Brazil, Indonesia, and South Africa) have paused in their monetary
easing cycles on account of inflation concerns. In emerging Europe, the scope for monetary
easing has been limited by the risk of exacerbating capital outflows. However, where
financing conditions are easing and exchange rates have appreciated, there may be scope for
with limited policy easing to support a resumption of growth
G-20 central banks will need eventually to unwind their extraordinary liquidity
support and withdraw conventional and unconventional monetary accommodation.
Interest rates will need to be raised as economies recover and output gaps are reduced, but
the path should take account of the withdrawal of fiscal support. To ensure transmission of
tighter monetary conditions to the real economy, central banks will also need to withdraw
excess bank reserves created by their exceptional liquidity provision and unconventional
measures. Thus, the first challenge is when to raise interest rates and the second is how to
withdraw excess liquidity.
In advanced G-20 economies, central banks can afford to maintain low interest rates
for an extended period, as underlying inflation is expected to remain very low. With
fiscal stimulus gradually receding, a premature tightening of monetary policy could
undercut the recovery. At the same time, a prolonged period of very low interest rates
could fuel excessive risk taking. This risk is limited over the near term, as weak
balance sheets and confidence are likely to weigh on credit availability. Nonetheless,
once a recovery is firmly underway, as signaled by recovering employment, monetary
policy will need to be tightened.
The situation is more varied across emerging G-20 economies, but monetary
accommodation will likely need to be withdrawn sooner. A number of these
economies, notably in Asia, are already enjoying relatively vigorous rebounds of
activity. Accordingly, unemployment is not forecast to be much higher in 2010 than
before the crisis, which suggests that inflation pressures would be less subdued than
in the advanced economies. Moreover, some of these economies are again seeing
significant asset price increases and credit growth in response to low interest rates,
raising the specter of renewed equity or real estate booms. Some emerging economies
should consider prudential actions to limit excessive credit creation.
Conventional monetary tightening will need to
be accompanied by steps to offset the impact of large
central bank balance sheets. The recent large
expansion of central bank balance sheets is mirrored in
the growth of bank reserves, which will need to be
mopped up as interest rates are raised to ensure the
transmission of policy rate changes to the real economy.
The composition of central bank assets will in part
determine the approach to be taken.
