Major central banks have acted aggressively, easing policy rates to near zero
and using their balance sheets to directly support intermediation. With the exception of
the ECB (which cut its refinancing rate further by 25 basis points to one percent in early
May), major advanced country central banks are now effectively at the lower bound for
policy rates. However, the impact of policy rates reductions on credit conditions, including
notably on borrowing rates, has been limited by financial disruptions that have weakened
the monetary transmission mechanism, with banks continuing to tighten lending standards,
albeit at a slower pace more recently. As a result, central banks have also taken a number of
unconventional measures, including direct intervention in credit markets.
Monetary policy should remain supportive until a sustained recovery takes
hold. Where room exists, policy rates should be cut further, and central banks should signal
that interest rates will remain low until a durable recovery is in sight. Moreover, where
credit intermediation remains impaired, central banks should continue to explore
unconventional measures to stimulate economic activity and improve credit flows. While
the size of central bank balance sheets has come off their late 2008 highs, as short-term
liquidity support to banks has been partly unwound, the Federal Reserve and Bank of
England’s balance sheets are now expanding again on the back of massive asset purchases.
That said, forceful monetary easing, including unconventional measures, large-
scale provision of liquidity, and the (support for and) resolution of systemically
important institutions have reduced extreme stress in financial conditions that
prevailed in late-2008 (Figure 3). The Fund’s financial stress indices for the major
advanced economies have all declined sharply, with some falling below pre-Lehman levels,
although they remain significantly elevated relative to levels prior to the crisis. 3 Provision of
guarantees on bank funding and expanded liquidity facilities have helped reduce tail risks
that the liquidity shock could have triggered cascading insolvencies in the financial sector.
Monetary policy in emerging economies has to balance the need to support
demand against the risk of exacerbating capital outflows or deteriorating credit
quality. Sharp declines in food and fuel prices have provided the room for central banks in
many of these economies to lower interest rates, and they have been appropriately cautious
in order to avoid disorderly exchange rate moves or triggering capital outflows. Large
international reserves have provided scope, in some cases, to counter exchange rate
volatility and sustain the availability of foreign currency funding, for example for trade
finance. However, reserve stockpiles have been reduced, leaving less room for maneuver.
Looking forward, the appreciation of exchange rates since the first quarter will help support
domestic demand, consistent with broader need to rebalance the global economy towards
higher consumption in those economies that had accumulated reserves before the financial
crisis. Also, authorities will need to remain vigilant against the prospect of deteriorating
credit quality emerging as a result of the monetary policy easing undertaken so far.
Developing clear and effective exit strategies from exceptional policy actions
will be central to ensure a smooth return to normal market functioning, to safeguard
the sustainability of public finances, and to contain concerns about inflation. Although
short-term policy requirements remain paramount, as signs of an economic turnaround in
the global economy become more prevalent, markets have begun to express their concern
about the future ramifications of unprecedented policy actions and massive public
intervention. To unwind policies in an orderly manner and reassure markets, policy makers
will need to develop (and communicate) plans that achieve timely and smooth exits for
extraordinary monetary, fiscal, and financial sector interventions, while being careful to
avoid a premature withdrawal of support that could set back the healing process and the
incipient recovery.
Central banks will need to devise plans to exit from unconventional measures to
ensure a smooth return to private intermediation and to forestall concerns that
inflation could rise rapidly. To balance inflation concerns—particularly in conjunction
with the large increase in government indebtedness and central bank balance sheets—and
the risk that liquidity is prematurely withdrawn while the nascent recovery is still fragile,
monetary authorities will need to communicate clearly the objectives and the tools of their
unconventional policies, as well as their exit strategies. Appropriate sequencing is important
for an orderly withdrawal. Short-term credit operations—where the scale of intervention is
determined by private demand—should unwind naturally as market conditions normalize.
The unwinding of medium- and long-term asset purchases is likely to be more gradual, and
new instruments may be required to re-absorb liquidity in a manner that balances the risks to
economic growth and price stability. Monetary policy frameworks will also need to pay
renewed attention to the role of asset prices and financial stability in the pursuit of their core
mandates.
To summarize, responding to an unprecedented global crisis and its aftermath
will require coherent and determined policy actions, orderly exits, and new
frameworks to address the challenges facing the global economy. Given the still-fragile
nature of the turnaround in global activity and financial markets, the paramount objectives
for monetary, fiscal, and financial sector policies are continued support for the recovery,
fully restoring the financial sector to health, and limiting downside risks. As market
conditions normalize and a self-sustaining recovery is established, exit strategies will need
to be implemented in timely fashion to ensure a smooth transition back to private
intermediation, to avoid a buildup of future risks to price and financial stability, and to
safeguard public finances. Finally, new policy frameworks—compatible with a needed shift
in the pattern of global demand—would facilitate adjustment to a more sustainable and
resilient configuration for global growth in the years ahead.
