The overall pace of policy adjustment and removal of financial support will depend on the
strength of recovery in private demand in each country and enduring financial stability. This
suggests that the timing of exits will be country specific, although coordination on some
specific fronts is desirable. For most countries, fiscal consolidation should be a top priority,
with monetary policy able to adjust more flexibly to achieve a desired level of overall
stimulus. The scale of fiscal adjustment required is large to ensure debt sustainability and to
restore room for policy maneuver, particularly in advanced economies. Fiscal reforms that
have long-term effects but that do not affect the economic recovery in the short-term (such as
entitlement reforms) should thus be implemented soon to enhance credibility. Current
differences in monetary policy conditions could give rise to larger capital inflows to
emerging market countries, accentuating the need for policies to encourage rebalancing the
global sources of demand. The principles laid out below are intended to establish common
ground for the design and implementation of policies during the exit from extraordinary
support measures taken during the crisis.
Forceful fiscal and monetary stimulus and financial sector support have helped ease
financial stress and played an important role in supporting activity, but may need to
be maintained for some time. One of the key lessons from experiences of similar
crises is that withdrawing policy stimulus too early can be very costly, particularly if
the financial system remains vulnerable and prone to adverse shocks. Further
advancing the process of financial restructuring and balance sheet repair (including
bank recapitalization) remains a priority to achieve a healthy financial system.
Achieving fiscal sustainability will be a complex process and will take longer
than normalizing monetary policy. Monetary policy can respond more quickly to achieve the
desired level of overall stimulus, when fiscal retrenchment begins. The strategy for fiscal
consolidation should be outlined and communicated now. Deficit-reducing and debt
management measures should commence as soon as private demand begins recovering. This
is advisable considering both the relative scales of policy adjustment required and managing
risks to both economic and financial recovery
For most countries, the risks presented by keeping stimulus in place too long suggest
that adjustment is a key priority. Maintaining fiscal stimulus longer than needed has
obvious and immediate consequences for debt accumulation. In many advanced
economies, monetary policy can afford to remain accommodative for an extended
period, given subdued price pressures. In a number of emerging economies, by
contrast, monetary policy may have to tighten sooner—and might therefore be more
synchronous with or even lead fiscal consolidation—if there are signs of rising
inflation or incipient financial vulnerabilities, including credit booms.
The challenges of placing fiscal policy on a sustainable path—both political and
economic—are greater than for normalizing monetary policy. The scale of fiscal
adjustment required to ensure fiscal sustainability will be large, particularly in
advanced economies. This suggests that fiscal policy changes that have long-term
effects but that do not affect the economic recovery in the short term (such as
entitlement reforms and strengthening fiscal frameworks and institutions) should be
implemented soon to enhance credibility.
Unconventional monetary policy does not necessarily have to be unwound
before raising policy rates.
Maintaining unconventional monetary policy measures does not necessarily
constrain increases in policy rates. Indeed, policy rates may need to rise before
unconventional monetary policy stimulus is fully withdrawn
In particular, to the extent that credit markets remain impaired, monetary tightening
may need to be led by a raising of policy rates. This is becoming increasingly relevant
for many emerging economies, notably in Asia, that are already witnessing relatively
vigorous rebounds of activity.
Monetary authorities have instruments to maintain control over interest rate policy.
This includes paying interest on excess reserves, even while central bank balance
sheets continue to provide support to some markets.

