In sequencing an exit from crisis-related policies, fiscal policy should generally take
priority. Maintaining an expansionary fiscal stance has a direct impact on the build-
up of debt. Accommodative monetary policy does not have such automatic
consequences and can be reversed quickly; in the current juncture, inflationary
pressures appear well contained. Furthermore, fiscal policy adjustment typically has a
long lead time relative to monetary policy. Hence, plans for fiscal consolidation
should generally take priority, all else given.
Monetary policy can remain accommodative in the major advanced countries,
but monetary tightening may be considered in some emerging economies facing risks of
overheating.
In advanced economies, central banks should maintain low policy rates through 2010,
as inflation is expected to remain low and unemployment high for some time. 1 This
can be achieved even while central banks begin to withdraw the emergency support
provided to banks and financial markets. As the priority in major advanced
economies is to put in place sound medium-term fiscal programs, tightening monetary
policies prematurely, as fiscal support is phased out, could undercut global recovery.
In some emerging economies (e.g., Brazil, emerging Asia), owing to rapidly closing
output gaps or concerns about credit quality, monetary accommodation is already
being removed or will need be to be removed relatively soon. In those economies
with broadly balanced external positions, monetary tightening may be complicated as
it could attract capital inflows that undermine competitiveness.
Monetary and fiscal policies can be used to reduce inflows where further reserve
accumulation or exchange rate appreciation are not warranted. If the economy is not
at risk of overheating, the appropriate policy response would be to lower interest rates
and to tighten fiscal policy, thus reducing currency appreciation pressures. In
economies facing high inflationary pressures, reducing interest rates is not an
attractive option, while both political considerations and implementation lags may
limit the scope for fiscal consolidation.
