Exiting from crisis-related public support policies should be viewed in the
context of bridging towards strong, sustained and balanced growth with price stability.
Attaining this objective will require meeting the onerous challenges to fiscal sustainability,
normalizing monetary policy carefully withdrawing financial sector support, and avoiding
policy inconsistencies across countries, as well as in the policy mix. To facilitate rebalanced
global growth: advanced economies with large current account deficits should transition
towards measures to raise savings; advanced economies with large surpluses should
prioritize structural reforms in labor and product markets that would bolster domestic
demand; and exits in emerging economies with excessive current account surpluses should
be accompanied by exchange rate appreciation. Fiscal consolidation in major advanced
economies will also mean that emerging economies will have to rely less on external
sources of demand to support growth.
In most advanced G-20 economies, ensuring fiscal sustainability is a key
priority and policy challenge, notably in light of the surge in government debt levels.
Maintaining an expansionary fiscal stance has a clear and direct impact on the build-up of
debt. Maintaining an accommodative monetary policy stance, which can be reversed
quickly, has few obvious direct downsides; the most important risk from this policy stance
in the current low inflationary environment is the potential for liquidity spillovers,
particularly to domestic asset markets and emerging economies. Also, a tightening of the
fiscal stance may help monetary and debt management, while a monetary tightening will
contribute to a worsening of the fiscal position. Hence, on balance fiscal consolidation
should generally take priority, all else given. Achieving fiscal sustainability will be a
difficult and prolonged process, making it imperative for consolidation to begin as soon as
there is clear evidence of self-sustaining recovery. Given a path for fiscal policies, monetary
policy can be set to achieve a desired level of overall stimulus, tightening as needed to
counter inflationary risks and maintain price stability.
Monetary policy can remain accommodative in the major advanced countries,
but central banks need to prepare and clearly communicate credible strategies for
unwinding the extraordinary monetary policy support. The crisis compelled central
banks to employ a wide range of crisis-intervention measures, in many cases unprecedented.
Unwinding should be tractable and central banks have the tools needed to tighten policy, but
there will be challenges.
The key objective will be to maintain price stability, but where financial stability
remains fragile, or key markets are not yet functioning, central banks may need to
maintain crisis-intervention measures or possibly introduce new targeted ones, even
within the context of an overall tightening of the monetary policy stance.
In a number of emerging economies, monetary policy may have to be tightened
relatively soon (or further where tightening has begun) and ahead of fiscal
consolidation, owing to rising inflation or incipient financial vulnerabilities. In
economies with broadly balanced external positions, monetary tightening may be
complicated, as it could amplify exchange rate pressures. These economies may have
to consider tightening their fiscal stance more quickly (while maintaining measures
aimed at mitigating the social impact of the crisis). Fiscal tightening should also be
the priority where stimulus measures have contributed directly to a strong rebound in
domestic demand, or where market concerns regarding public debt sustainability are
high or rising. Under some circumstances, reserve accumulation, restrictions on
capital inflows and macro-prudential measures could also form part of the policy mix.
Monetary and fiscal policies can help to reduce inflows if the central bank has
exhausted the sterilization possibilities and risks losing monetary control, or does not want
to accumulate further reserves (assuming that further exchange rate appreciation would not
be appropriate). The policy response would be to lower interest rates, thus reducing
incentives for inflows, and to tighten fiscal policy–particularly when capital inflows are
driven by fiscal expansion–thus reducing currency appreciation pressures. However, if the
economy is at risk of overheating and there are inflationary pressures, reducing interest rates
is not an attractive policy option, while both political considerations and implementation
lags may limit the scope for fiscal consolidation.
