In the euro area, EMU-wide policies should support individual countries’ efforts
to repair public and private balance sheets and implement structural reforms to
restore competitiveness. Reversing financial fragmentation (e.g., reducing financial home
bias, improving cross-border bank flows; reducing credit spreads in the periphery) is
essential to improve the transmission of monetary policy as well as foster sustainable
growth. This will require making tangible progress toward a genuine economic monetary
union—starting with a banking union with greater fiscal integration. Key elements are
Monetary policy in the major advanced economies should remain
accommodative. Fears of high inflation appear overstated—central banks have the tools
needed to mop up liquidity and tighten their policy stance should inflation expectations
unexpectedly rise. Nevertheless, there is a concern about diminishing effectiveness of
unconventional actions, their side effects (e.g., volatile capital flows), and potential difficulties
related to unwinding them. While advanced economy central banks can likely address short-
term issues related to policy normalization given their large balance sheets, they should
continue to monitor any unintended consequences of their policies on sovereign-bank
linkages, corporate leverage, financial innovation, international capital flows, and asset price
bubbles.
In the United States, further repair of household balance sheets is needed, as middle-
income households, who were hurt severely by the housing bust, have made limited
progress in repairing their balance sheets. In the euro area, improving the
effectiveness of monetary policy will require the broad range of policies discussed
above to reverse financial fragmentation. In the meantime, there is some room for a
lower policy rate.
Some emerging economies can afford to maintain current monetary policy settings or
ease if downside risks materialize, while others may have to take measures to gradually
tighten financial conditions. Some emerging economies should remain watchful of
inflationary pressures and should not lower interest rates further. Policymakers in
Brazil should begin unwinding monetary stimulus as the recovery proceeds to ensure
inflation expectations remain well anchored. Room for monetary easing is also more
limited where strong credit expansion continues, or where currencies are
undervalued. In countries with still-elevated credit growth, supervisory and macro-
prudential measures should be deployed to curb sectoral excesses.
