In advanced economies, macroeconomic policies should support growth. Supporting
growth and creating jobs is the main challenge in the major advanced economies. Broadly
speaking, monetary policy accommodation should continue to play its supportive role, given low
inflation and still large output gaps, and fiscal adjustment should be measured, while being
anchored by a credible medium term roadmap for sustainability. Financial sector reforms also
need to be urgently completed.
Monetary policy needs to remain accommodative until the recovery is well
established, while containing potentially adverse side effects.
More needs to be done in the euro area, where the growth outlook is very weak,
unemployment is high, and inflation is projected well below the 2 percent target.
Conventional monetary policy should be eased further. Targeted unconventional
measures should play a role in addressing uncertainties about term funding availability for
banks and the lack of credit for nonfinancial corporations, in particular SMEs. One such
option could be a longer term LTRO combined with a review of current collateral policies,
particularly on loans to SMEs. The recent forward guidance provided by the ECB to anchor
interest rate expectations was a welcome step. The breathing space provided by
exceptionally accommodative monetary policies should be used by authorities to tackle
underlying issues that prevent a solid return to growth.
In Japan, the BoJ’s objective to raise inflation to 2
percent and the sweeping enhancements to the
monetary framework are welcome. Despite some
signs of increasing inflation expectations, it is not
yet well-entrenched. Considerable uncertainty
remains about the commitment of the
government to put in place the complete package
of policies required for a successful outcome.
While the recent cabinet decision on the fiscal and
growth strategies is welcome, more concrete and
decisive measures should be formulated in the
near future.
In the United States, while underlying growth has been relatively robust, there is still a long
way to go on the labor market, as unemployment remains high and labor force
participation below trends. The Fed’s policy should thus remain accommodative, including
through its UMP, as benefits still outweigh the costs. At the same time, strong prudential
oversight and supervision of the financial system is essential to address emerging
vulnerabilities in both the bank and non-bank financial sector owing to ultra low interest
rates. There are incipient signs of rising exposure to both interest rate and credit risk in
regional banks that require increased vigilance, as low interest rates squeeze interest
margins. Vulnerabilities may also be building in the non-bank financial sector, with a rapid
expansion of agency real estate investment trusts (REITs), weakening underwriting
standards in the leveraged loan market (covenant-lite loans issuance has returned to pre-
crisis levels), and higher credit and liquidity risks taken by pension funds and insurance
companies. In the future, careful communication about the eventual exit from monetary
stimulus will help reduce volatility in global financial markets.
Monetary policy. Requirements differ across countries. Monetary easing can be the first
line of defense against liquidity pressures and downside risks where inflation is firmly
anchored, although capital flow reversals, external financing needs, and financial stability
risks might constrain scope for action in some countries. Monetary policy should have
some leeway to ease in emerging Asia, especially in 2014, as the output gap re-opens,
core inflation falls, and inflation expectations are well anchored. Several countries have
already cut policy rates in response to the recent weakness in activity (e.g., India, Korea). In
Latin America, economies are operating close to speed limit, which restricts available
policy room. In economies where monetary policy is still very accommodative and
inflation above target, some monetary policy tightening may be needed to bring inflation
back to target. Brazil continues to face a considerable inflation challenge, with inflation
exceeding the upper limit of the inflation target band, which requires further monetary
tightening.
Fiscal and structural policies. Policymakers should also address structural obstacles to
continued high growth while rebuilding fiscal policy buffers. Public debt is above pre-
crisis-levels in most countries and structural issues and lower potential output point to
lower fiscal space than previously estimated. Buffers should be rebuilt to create space for
action should downside risks materialize. Priority should be given to fiscal consolidation
(particularly in countries where current account deficits are widening), with monetary
policy remaining the first line of defense. In some (e.g. India), the magnitude of fiscal
problems requires an overhaul of tax and subsidy policies.
