While monetary policy should continue supporting the recovery, challenges are
increasingly different across countries. With output gaps still large, and inflation running
below target, accommodative monetary conditions
remain essential for advanced economies, including in
the United States, to avoid cyclical impediments to
growth from becoming structural. However, given the
unevenness of the recovery across economies,
challenges faced by central banks are different. In the
United States and the United Kingdom, where the
recovery is stronger, the challenge is to manage exit
from exceptionally accommodative monetary policies as
output gaps shrink. In contrast, monetary policy in the
euro area and Japan is expected to remain more
accommodative for an extended period as they fight
low inflation (euro area) or try to persistently raise
inflation and inflation expectations (Japan). As some
start exiting UMP, well-calibrated communication and
cooperation will be key to avoid or manage bouts of financial market volatility. Specifically:
In the United States, the main challenge is to reach the appropriate speed of monetary
policy normalization, which is made difficult by uncertainties about the cyclical position and
monetary transmission. Current plans to end tapering later this year and increase policy
rates from the middle of next year appear appropriate, given the sizable slack. However, the
timing of the increase in policy rates may have to be adjusted in function of developments
on the inflation and unemployment fronts. The United Kingdom faces similar challenges:
while m onetary policy should stay accommodative for now, it might, however, have to be
tightened quickly if costs run ahead of productivity growth or slack is absorbed, or
Tightening could also be considered if macroprudential tools prove insufficient to deal with
financial stability risks with due consideration to the tradeoffs involved vis-à-vis the real
economy.
In Japan, monetary policy has helped lift inflation and inflation expectations towards the
2-percent target. Given that the current aggressive pace of monetary easing may need to be
maintained for an extended period, providing more information about asset purchases
beyond end-2014 could further enhance transparency. In case actual or expected inflation
stagnate or growth disappoints, the Bank of Japan should act swiftly through further and/or
longer-dated asset purchases. There is also room to expand the Loan Support Program in
order to further enhance the monetary policy transmission. Finally, communication should
focus on the overarching goal of achieving the inflation target in a stable manner through a
more transparent presentation of the BoJ’s forecast and underlying assumptions .
Financial stability risks related to a prolonged period of low interest rates bring macro-
prudential policies to the forefront. Excessive risk-taking may be building in some sectors (U.S.
corporate credit and insurance markets, housing price booms in a number of smaller advanced
economies) after more than five years of exceptionally low rates (see annex). Completing the
reform of financial regulation and deploying macro-prudential tools as a first line of defense, as
needed, are essential to limit financial risks. This will also reduce the risk of premature monetary
policy tightening not warranted by the cyclical position. It will also make systemic institutions
more resilient, help contain pro-cyclical asset price and credit dynamics, and cushion the
consequences of liquidity squeezes if volatility spikes.
The pace and composition of fiscal adjustment should be attuned to supporting both
the recovery and long-term growth . Fiscal consolidation should continue to proceed gradually,
anchored in credible medium-term plans, which are still lacking in some countries (notably, in
Japan and the United States). At the same time, the design of fiscal policy should better support
the long-run growth potential of the economy, including by enhancing infrastructure investment,
provided that infrastructure needs have been identified, there is slack in the economy, monetary
policy is accommodative, investment processes are relatively efficient, and debt-to-GDP ratios
are not already high. Specifically:
In the euro area, the overall fiscal stance is broadly neutral, although a number of countries
are still tightening, even if at a slower pace. This strikes the right balance between demand
support and debt reduction. Nevertheless, Germany, which has completed its fiscal
consolidation, could afford to finance much-needed public investment in infrastructure,
without violating fiscal rules. Large negative growth surprises in euro area countries should
not trigger additional consolidation efforts, which would be self-defeating. Moreover, if
deflation risks materialize and monetary policy options are depleted, the escape clauses in
the fiscal framework may need to be used to respond in these circumstances.
The focus of macroeconomic policies should remain on addressing vulnerabilities
and rebuilding policy buffers. The strengthening of activity in advanced economies and
looming normalization of monetary policy in some implies that external financial conditions—
both availability of capital flows and borrowing costs—will eventually tighten. When risk
sentiment changes, having stronger macroeconomic fundamentals as well as the policy space
and credibility to react have proven to be critical to reduce volatility and negative spillovers (see
Annex). Exchange rate flexibility, alongside credible macroeconomic policies and frameworks, has
also proven to be an essential tool in coping with volatile capital flows.
The appropriate course for policy to balance fostering growth and managing
vulnerabilities will be country-specific. Countries should continue to rebuild monetary and
fiscal policy space where it is limited—considering possible tradeoffs between building buffers
and slowing growth—and strengthen policy frameworks where their credibility has come into
question. Specifically:
In Brazil, slowing economic conditions will make it difficult to achieve the original budget
targets for 2014. Nevertheless, working towards meeting the official primary surplus target
with sustainable policies while continuing to wind down policy lending is important to put
gross public debt on a firmly downward path and boost market confidence. With inflation
still elevated, monetary tightening may have to be stepped up should inflation expectations
worsen.
In India, more efforts are needed to continue reducing stubbornly high inflation and the
large fiscal deficit. While the new government’s emphasis on continued fiscal consolidation is
welcome, the quality and durability of the consolidation remain of concern. The government
should articulate structural measures to underpin the consolidation path, including subsidy
reform and progress on the Goods and Services Tax. Sustainably lowering inflation will also
require further increases in the policy rate and a simpler monetary framework with clear
objectives and operational autonomy for the RBI.
