Prospects for an uneven recovery points to an asynchronous unwinding of
monetary stimulus in advanced economies. With output gaps still large, and inflation running
below target, accommodative monetary conditions remain essential to support demand.
However, the unbalanced recovery across economies suggests that challenges faced by central
banks differ, with well-crafted communication continuing to play a critical role, given that
protracted monetary support has raised financial stability concerns:
In the United States, with growth expected to increase
above trend in the remainder of 2014 and 2015, the main
policy issue is the appropriate speed of monetary policy
normalization. The timing of the policy rate increase
should be attuned to inflation and labor market
developments. In the United Kingdom, still accommodative
monetary policy has been combined with macro-
prudential tools to contain financial stability risks.
In Japan, monetary policy has helped lift inflation and inflation expectations. On October
31 st , the Bank of Japan (BoJ) expanded its Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing
(QQE) framework by accelerating purchases of JGBs (and extending their maturity) and
tripling the purchases of private assets, which should support domestic demand. For these
measures to succeed, they need to be supported by growth and fiscal reforms.
Macro-prudential tools should be the first line of defense against financial stability
risks. Excessive risk-taking may have built in some sectors—credit booms in a number of smaller
advanced economies and the underpricing of risks in certain segments of U.S. financial
markets—after more than five years of exceptionally low rates. Deploying macro-prudential
tools—which in some cases may require changes to regulatory and legal structures—is essential
to limit financial risks and reduce the risk of monetary policy tightening not warranted by the
cyclical position. It will also make systemic institutions more resilient, help contain pro-cyclical
asset price and credit dynamics, and cushion the consequences of liquidity squeezes if volatility
spikes.
Fiscal policy should be growth friendly, with the pace and composition of fiscal
adjustment—where needed—attuned to supporting the recovery. Fiscal consolidation should
proceed gradually, anchored in credible medium-term plans, which are lacking in some countries
(notably Japan and the United States). At the same time, the design of fiscal policy should
support growth, including by enhancing infrastructure investment (see Annex) where needs have
been identified, there is slack in the economy, and investment processes are relatively efficient
(e.g., Germany and the United States). When there is economic slack and monetary
accommodation, short-run demand effects are stronger, and the boost in output can lead to a
decline in the public-debt-to-GDP ratio. Provided that there is space, a supportive fiscal stance
can help offset short-term adverse effects of structural reforms on aggregate demand, bringing
forward the growth benefits. In response to negative growth surprises in the euro area flexibility
within the fiscal governance framework could and should be used where possible to avoid
triggering additional consolidation efforts. Finally, the pace of fiscal withdrawal in 2014–15 is
broadly appropriate in Japan, but a post-2015 consolidation plan remains needed.
In some economies (Brazil, India, Turkey), maintaining the course of fiscal consolidation is
critical, given large fiscal deficits and high inflation in some cases, and high external
borrowing that has increased exposure to external funding risks in others. Monetary policy
tightening may also be necessary should inflation expectations worsen.
