Policy priorities have taken on more urgency compared to the February G-20 Surveillance Note.
Notably, raising actual and potential growth remains a key objective. In advanced economies,
accommodative monetary policy remains essential. Fiscal policy should be growth friendly, including
through increased infrastructure investment. In many emerging economies, macroeconomic policy
space to support growth is more limited, with inflation still above target in some economies, and
fiscal positions weaker than desirable in others. Structural reforms are needed to raise potential
output in both advanced and emerging economies. Joint efforts by deficit and surplus economies to
rebalance global demand would reduce excess external imbalances while sustaining growth.
Accommodative monetary policies remain essential in many advanced economies,
given still sizable output gaps. In most advanced economies, output gaps are still substantial,
inflation is expected to remain below target, and monetary policy remains constrained by the zero
lower bound. The expected boost in economic activity from lower oil prices has not materialized,
and lower energy costs are keeping inflation low. Hence, monetary policy must stay
accommodative to prevent real interest rates from rising prematurely.
In the United States, the main near-term policy issue is the appropriate timing and pace of
monetary policy normalization. The Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC) decision
should remain data-dependent and with little evidence of meaningful wage and price
pressures so far, the normalization is expected to be gradual. An effective monetary policy
communication strategy will remain essential, also in light of differences between market and
FOMC expectations about the path of short-term interest rates.
In the euro area, the ECB’s expanded asset purchase program has improved confidence and
financial conditions, and raised inflation expectations initially. More recently however, inflation
expectations have reversed, and the euro has strengthened, which could put downward
pressure on prices. Hence, the program should be extended if there is not sufficient
improvement in inflation consistent with meeting medium-term price stability objectives.
These monetary policy efforts should be supported by measures to strengthen bank balance
sheets, which would help to improve monetary policy transmission and credit market
conditions. Stricter regulation of nonperforming loans and measures to improve insolvency
and foreclosure procedures are a priority in this regard.
In Japan, accelerating structural reforms is critical to boost confidence and contribute to
higher domestic demand and favorable wage-price dynamics. In this context, the Bank of
Japan should stand ready for further easing. It should also consider providing stronger
guidance to markets by moving to more forecast-oriented monetary policy communication to
increase the transparency of its assessment of inflation prospects and strengthen the signal of
its commitment to the inflation target.
Policymakers in many emerging economies face a growth slowdown accompanied
by a more challenging environment. On the external front, financial conditions have tightened,
commodity prices have declined sharply, and exchange rates have been under pressure. On the
domestic front, macroeconomic policy space remains limited as several economies have
experienced inflation above target or/and weaker fiscal positions than before the crisis. External
and financial vulnerabilities have risen, and could be exacerbated if capital flow reversals
materialize, as private sector leverage has increased significantly, and current account positions
have deteriorated. Finally, lack of credibility, notably where inflation is above target, complicates
the monetary policy response as exchange rate depreciation could feed into inflation expectations
and lead to a worsening inflation outlook.
