Reducing uncertainties surrounding “Brexit” would help reduce the risk of a protracted
tightening of financial conditions. It will be important to have clarity on the process and objectives
that will guide discussions between the U.K. and the E.U. Of primary importance is a smooth and
predictable transition to a new set of post-exit trading and financial relationships that as much as
possible preserves gains from trade. Where required and feasible, more supportive macroeconomic
policies can reduce the short-term impact on growth. Policymakers should stand ready to act more
aggressively should the impact of financial market turbulence and higher uncertainty threaten to
materially weaken the global outlook. In the euro area, policymakers should work together to
demonstrate their continuing commitment to the E.U. and the monetary union including by agreeing
on a common policy response to the refugee surge and securing external borders. Over the medium
run, priority should be given to completing the banking union, strengthening the single market, and
moving closer to a fiscal union.
Short-term demand support still has an important part to play in advanced economies,
but needs greater emphasis on growth-friendly fiscal policies. In a majority of advanced countries,
output gaps remain negative, weak labor markets threaten to permanently scar especially the young
in the workforce, and inflation is low and far off target. Where monetary policy is becoming over-
burdened, domestic policy coordination can help to make macroeconomic support effective. This
requires a broad-based approach combining all available policy tools and strong policy frameworks,
which anchor fiscal and monetary policy in the long run while allowing for effective demand
management in the short run. Specifically:
Monetary policy. Central banks should continue to use all available instruments to raise inflation,
including negative interest rates, where appropriate, while carefully monitoring the potential
impact on banks, pension funds and insurance companies as well as market functioning. In the
United States, Federal Reserve policy should remain data dependent. There is a clear case for the
Fed to proceed along a very gradual upward path for the fed funds rate, conscious of global
disinflationary trends and confirming along the way that wage and price inflation are indeed
maintaining their steady upward momentum.
To avoid the risk of a hard landing and lower their exposure to capital flow reversals,
emerging economies should rebuild policy buffers. In China, macro policies need to be adjusted
for a moderate slowdown, allowing growth to settle at a sustainable level. This requires slowing credit
expansion and switching from off-budget investment to more on-budget, pro-consumption
measures. Strengthening transparency, especially in communicating policy objectives and enhancing
data quality, will be key to minimize spillovers and financial volatility. In Brazil, the room for monetary
policy easing is limited by underlying inflationary pressures and fiscal consolidation should continue
to reduce large deficits. The new government should complement the proposed cap on federal
noninterest spending with tax measures and address spending rigidities and unsustainable mandates,
including in the pension system. The quality of fiscal consolidation in India should be improved
through a comprehensive tax reform (such as introducing the goods and services tax and improving
tax administration) and measures to further reduce subsidies. With shrinking fiscal buffers, many
commodity exporters need to develop new growth models and tackle fiscal adjustment, including
through reduced but more efficient public expenditures, stronger fiscal frameworks, and mobilizing
new sources of revenues. Exchange rate flexibility can usefully cushion the impact of adverse external
shocks, provided that the effects of currency depreciations on balance sheets and domestic inflation
rates are contained. Even as vulnerabilities are addressed, emerging economies can continue to be a
strong locomotive of global economic and trade growth through well-sequenced structural reforms
that provide near-term demand support.
The right policies will also help to reduce external imbalances. More fiscal stimulus in
advanced surplus economies with fiscal space, continuing monetary support and growth-friendly fiscal
rebalancing in deficit economies, and structural reforms would contribute to external rebalancing. For
instance, streamlining service or product sector regulations in surplus economies (e.g., in Japan, Korea,
and Germany) will encourage domestic demand and relative price adjustments. Facilitating
diversification and expansion of the non-commodity sector (in Brazil, Saudi Arabia and South Africa),
and further labor market reform (e.g., in France, Spain, and South Africa) would boost productivity and
competitiveness in economies with external positions weaker than fundamentals.
