To safeguard the current growth momentum, the macroeconomic policy mix should be
adjusted to changing circumstances. Following the IMF’s Article IV policy advice, countries with
negative output gaps which have fiscal space should support growth with all available tools, while
those with closed output gaps should withdraw short-term fiscal stimulus and calibrate monetary
policy to inflation developments. 7 In some advanced economies that have fiscal space and are
operating at or close to capacity, additional spending could boost potential growth and create positive
transitional spillovers for others. 8 Where fiscal space is a constraint—for example because of
particularly high levels of public debt or other concerns—consolidation efforts should be gradual and
as growth-friendly as possible. Many countries would benefit from a more growth-friendly budget
composition. In countries facing too-low growth and too-high inflation, macroeconomic policies will
have to weigh possible trade-offs. Emerging economies still adjusting to the lower commodity price
environment should avoid expansionary fiscal policies and focus on fostering longer-term adjustment
instead.
Monetary policy stances are generally aligned with IMF recommendations. In most
advanced economies, monetary policy is expected to remain appropriately accommodative, while the
pace of normalization in the United States—which is reaching full employment—should continue to
be gradual and data-dependent, alongside well communicated plans for the Federal Reserve’s balance
sheet. By contrast, most emerging economies are projected to maintain neutral or somewhat
contractionary monetary stances, suitably contributing to bring or keep inflation in line with central
bank targets.
External rebalancing should continue. While macroeconomic policies are but one determinant of
the current account, they have contributed to maintain excess imbalances, which illustrates the
benefits of recalibrating the policy mix across both surplus and deficit countries (see IMF 2017
External Sector Report). With monetary policy set to remain appropriately supportive, this will be
helped by the recommended use of fiscal space—for example, to raise potential growth or reduce
still-open output gaps—in G-20 excess surplus economies (such as Germany and Korea) and
gradual fiscal consolidation in excess deficit countries (United Kingdom, United States).
Private debt and financial vulnerabilities require attention. Addressing corporate and bank
vulnerabilities is a priority in many G-20 countries, including in several emerging economies and
the euro area, where the structural overcapacity of the financial sector elevates operation costs
and reduces profitability. This task requires a faster recognition of non-performing assets, stronger
bank capital buffers, and better corporate debt restructuring mechanisms. China should build on
recent efforts to address financial vulnerabilities by continuing regulatory/supervisory tightening,
greater recognition of bad assets, more market-based credit allocation, and gradually reducing
monetary policy accommodation if core inflation picks up. In many countries, macroprudential
policies should be used to address corporate and bank vulnerabilities by reducing the buildup of
leverage or strengthening buffers.
Implementing the proposed adjustments to the policy mix would also contribute to
more sustainable growth. At least three effects are at work. First, where fiscal policy directly supports
infrastructure investment (for example, Germany), it will raise productivity and the growth potential in
the future, enhancing sustainability. Second, additional short-term demand support from fiscal policies
where output gaps are negative can accelerate the benefits of certain structural reforms, such as
measures that raise labor supply, which are particularly relevant for European G-20 members but also
several emerging economies (see next section). Finally, to the extent that fiscal and monetary policies
are adjusted to make growth more balanced and reduce vulnerabilities, they will also decrease the risk
of crisis, and thereby, make growth more lasting and sustainable.
