In the United States, monetary policy should
continue to gradually normalize and remain
data dependent, and plans for the Fed’s
balance sheet should be well-communicated;
fiscal policy should ensure that the ratio of
debt to GDP is on a downward path, while
supporting the longer-term potential of the
economy. In contrast, where inflation is still
below central bank targets and output gaps
remain negative, monetary policy should stay
supportive (Japan, euro area) and available
fiscal space should be used actively to provide
further
additional
support.
A
more
expansionary fiscal stance in Germany would
not only allow a much-needed increase in
public investment and raise potential output, it
would also support external adjustment, while
at the same time having positive spillovers to
other euro area economies where there is still
cyclical slack. In countries where fiscal
adjustment is needed to avoid destabilizing
debt dynamics and rebuild policy buffers,
consolidation is appropriate and should be
supported by growth-friendly measures (for
example, in Italy).
In emerging markets, wherever possible,
policymakers should continue to let the
exchange rate act as a buffer against shocks.
Where public debt is elevated, fiscal space
should be re-built through growth-friendly
consolidation (Brazil, India, Mexico). A growth-
friendly approach is particularly important
where there are still significant output gaps,
but the scope for monetary easing is
constrained by above-target inflation.
Joint policy action by surplus and deficit economies would help address external
imbalances in a growth-friendly way benefiting all. For example, in the short term, some excess-
surplus economies would benefit from using available fiscal space to boost public investment or
domestic demand more broadly (including Germany and Korea) helping also to reduce their excessive
current account surpluses. At the same time, excess-deficit economies such as the United States and
the United Kingdom should embark on growth-friendly fiscal consolidation. To tackle structural
imbalances, advanced excess-surplus economies should implement policies to reduce barriers to
foreign competition and domestic investments in certain sectors, especially services, and to increase
labor force participation of the elderly. Excess-surplus emerging markets should focus on expanding
social safety nets and reducing direct and indirect obstacles to trade, including subsidies and other
forms of state support, for example to state-owned enterprises. Excess-deficit economies, on the other
hand, need to implement structural reforms to improve competitiveness, which may include wage
moderation in line with productivity growth. More generally, where monetary policy is constrained, as
in individual euro area members, fiscal and structural policies to facilitate relative price adjustments
should take priority.
