Short- and medium-term prospects point to a slow, sluggish recovery that is subject to mainly downside risks. Policies need to accelerate the rebalancing of demand from public to private sources in advanced economies and from external deficit to surplus economies. In many advanced economies, the financial sector remains the Achilles heel of recovery prospects for private demand. Insufficient progress with repair and reform is weighing on credit, and slowing the normalization of monetary and fiscal policies, with adverse spillovers on emerging economies. Accelerated financial sector restructuring and reform should thus be top priorities. Government budgetary policies are in the process of moving from short-term stimulus to medium-term consolidation. However, fiscal policies need to urgently deliver measures that lower deficits over the medium-term. This is needed not only to halt and ultimately reverse the large rise in public debt ratios, but also to help create room for policy maneuver to support private demand. Additionally, fiscal adjustment needs to be supported with structural reform. Policies that eliminate distortions to domestic demand in key emerging economies would strengthen prospects for external demand rebalancing, supporting a more robust recovery in both emerging and advanced economies. Fiscal adjustment needs to begin in 2011. Fiscal consolidation remains essential for strong, sustained growth over the medium run. If downside risks to global growth materialize, threatening to slow growth appreciably more than expected, monetary policy should be the first line of defense, although this line has become thin. Accordingly, in countries with fiscal room, automatic stabilizers should be allowed to play freely, and where stabilizers are small, temporary support, such as extended unemployment benefits or wage subsidies, could be continued. Additionally, to sustain recovery in these countries some of the consolidation planned for 2011 might also have to be temporarily postponed. The timing, pace, and sequence of exiting from supportive policies will vary by country, depending on how robust the recovery of private demand as well as financial conditions. In most G-20 advanced economies, public debt sustainability requires exits from crisis-induced policies as well as broader adjustments to improve net debt levels. Reflecting market concerns, vulnerable economies have front-loaded fiscal adjustment. There is increasing divergence in the monetary policy stances between advanced and emerging economies, reflecting macroeconomic developments, while financial sector support has been extended in some European countries. Monetary policy has remained highly accommodative in many economies. Policy rates in major advanced economies are exceptionally low, and markets expect them to remain low for an extended period. A tightening cycle has begun in other advanced economies (for example, Australia, Canada, Korea), but these central banks have signaled caution in further tightening given increased downside risks to the global economy. In emerging economies, the central banks of Brazil and India have raised policy rates given the pace of output recoveries, but others, such as Russia, have maintained rates or even reduced them. 