The financial sector remains the Achilles’ heel of recovery prospects for private demand. In many advanced economies, insufficient progress with repair and reform is weighing on credit growth, and slowing the normalization of monetary and fiscal policies, with adverse spillovers on emerging economies, through large and volatile capital flows. Accelerated financial sector restructuring and reform should thus be top priorities. Moving expeditiously to address the legacies of the crisis—including bank funding concerns, the resolution of weak banks, and the restructuring of balance sheets for distressed households—as well as to alleviate regulatory uncertainty will strengthen financial systems and help catalyze rapid private-demand-led growth. If growth risks to slow appreciably more than expected, some of the planned consolidation could be slowed or postponed in countries with more fiscal room. Monetary policy must remain the first line of defense, although this line is becoming increasingly thin in most advanced economies. In all but the most vulnerable countries, automatic stabilizers should be allowed to operate fully and, where stabilizers are small, temporary support (such as extended unemployment benefits or wage subsidies) could be continued. Given a fragile recovery, an accommodative monetary policy stance remains appropriate in advanced economies, but negative spillovers to other economies, in particular emerging economies, need to be closely watched and managed carefully. In particular, maintaining accommodative monetary policy through 2011, including through an expansion of central bank balance sheets, can counteract some of the contractionary effects of fiscal consolidation. At the same time, however, policymakers should be mindful of the impact of such action on other economies, notably through large and volatile capital flows. A key to addressing this challenge is to expeditiously reform and repair financial sectors in the major advanced economies, which would both help catalyze a sustained private demand-led recovery in these economies, allow for interest rates increases and limit spillovers to emerging economies.  