Financial repair: strengthen capital buffers. restructure and resolve weak banks. Along with addressing sovereign tensions, removing uncertainty about the resilience of banks is the top priority for the euro area. Recovery in advanced economies will need readily- available credit to allow easy monetary conditions to pass through. Building bank capital buffers will help to achieve this by breaking the adverse feedback loop between rising sovereign spreads, deteriorating bank funding, and flagging activity. Policymakers should urge banks in need of capital to raise it from private sources, and either restructure or resolve weak banks. But public capital injections may also be necessary. National backstops should be used where fiscal space exists. Ultimately, in some European cases, this may well entail the use of pooled euro area resources, including EFSF funds. This might necessitate additional measures to make the facility more effective. Importantly, countries that do implement strong recapitalization programs should not be left to fall into a downward spiral for lack of adequate external support. Monetary policy: maintain accommodation. Given falling confidence and activity as well as well-anchored inflation expectations, monetary policy in advanced G-20 economies should remain very accommodative. There is scope for lower ECB policy rates. The Federal Reserve, Bank of England, and Bank of Japan should stand ready to continue their deployment of unconventional measures and take further steps if needed. Prudential authorities will need to be watchful of risks flowing from low interest rates. Emerging G-20 economies need to be nimble in dealing with potentially adverse spillovers from advanced economies, and continue to strengthen macroeconomic policy frameworks. Monetary policy should be the first response to spillovers from advanced economies as long as inflationary pressures remain in check. Fiscal positions should generally aim at rebuilding policy space. However, if growth begins to slow substantially, emerging economies with fiscal space (China, Indonesia, Mexico, and South Africa) should ease the pace of consolidation, including by allowing automatic stabilizers to fully operate. Most emerging G-20 economies need to bolster their financial stability frameworks to cope with volatile capital flows, including notably from sharp swings in global risk aversion. 