There is a need to put the global financial system on a more resilient footing. The matter is more pressing in Europe due to sovereign contagion risks. Though there has been progress on banking system repair, the pace is too slow. The pace of recapitalization needs to be accelerated in order to provide cushions against asset losses or shocks to liquidity. Vulnerabilities are currently masked by unusually accommodative monetary conditions, but the window of opportunity to prepare the financial system against potential systemic shocks could close unexpectedly. In some emerging markets, the task is to avoid overheating and prevent the build-up of financial imbalances. In such economies—which include Brazil, India and Turkey—there is room for further consolidation. This will take pressure off monetary and prudential policies and create fiscal space to respond to future shocks. It would also be beneficial to reorient spending—notably, to protect vulnerable sections of society against commodity price increases. Authorities should aim to protect the poor and vulnerable groups through targeted social safety nets, but avoid policies that seek to insulate domestic markets from high world prices (for example, export bans or subsidies), which dampens the supply response and amplifies global price volatility. Monetary Policy: Accommodative in Advanced Economies. More Tightening in Emerging Economies In most advanced economies, monetary policy should stay accommodative. Given excess capacity, recent signs that growth has slowed, and planned fiscal consolidation, current monetary policy accommodation should remain as long as medium-term inflation expectations remain well-anchored. A number of emerging market economies are already operating at or above capacity. There monetary policy tightening is needed, along with greater exchange rate flexibility and the use of macroprudential tools. While many emerging market and developing economies are already raising policy rates, real rates still remain low or even negative. Thus, policy tightening will have to continue. Dealing with commodity price rises poses a particular challenge. Monetary authorities need to prevent such rises from generating successive wage-price increases. Authorities can afford to be more accommodative in those economies where the credibility of monetary policy is high. However, where shares of food and energy in consumption are high and policy credibility is low, as is more common, authorities will have to react faster and more strongly. 