The main challenge for policymakers is to act forcefully to address downside risks with strong policy implementation. durable medium-term fiscal adjustment. and targeted structural reform. In the euro area—building on OMT and ESM activation, further action is also needed to strengthen banks, address structural shortcomings and complete EMU. Circumstances vary across emerging markets, but many should act to restore fiscal buffers over time, use monetary policy to guard against downside risks, and rely on macro-prudential measures to safeguard financial stability. Continued demand rebalancing from deficit to surplus economies would strengthen global growth and, if done properly, would help resolve their internal imbalances. In the euro area, robust action and follow-through are required on multiple fronts. Sovereigns under stress need to continue to adjust and request appropriate EFSF/ESM support if needed. and support for them and their banks provided via the ESM would relieve funding pressures and break the adverse feedback loops between sovereigns and banks. Meanwhile, the ECB’s commitment to act on secondary markets via the OMT is critical to address elevated risk premia due to convertibility concerns within the euro area, while maintaining a very accommodative monetary policy should support demand. Anti- crisis measures need to be anchored by a vision of—as well as a reasonably fast and tangible progress toward—a more complete monetary union, supported by a banking union and greater fiscal integration. Monetary policy should continue to aid recovery. Central banks have been at the forefront of the policy response to the recent global slowdown, and should continue supporting the recovery, while managing risks to price stability In advanced economies, monetary policy should remain very accommodative and central banks should stand ready to do more if needed. In Japan, further monetary easing may also be needed to reach the 1 percent inflation goal. The effectiveness of the easing in Japan would be enhanced by broadening asset purchases to include more equities and corporate bonds and government bonds with longer maturities and by simultaneously adopting broad structural and fiscal reforms to achieve a sustained recovery. In the United States, improving the transmission of the monetary easing would require resolution of the household debt overhang. In the euro area, restoring the transmission channel requires addressing counterparty risk in the interbank market and the redenomination risk. Central banks should also carefully monitor unintended consequences their policies might have, for instance on sovereign-bank linkages, corporate leverage, and financial innovation as well as external spillovers. Policy requirements differ vastly among emerging economies, but many can afford to stay on hold or ease if downside risks materialize given the receding inflation pressures. Nevertheless, some countries in Asia and Latin America face late-cycle credit risks as nonperforming loans have started to turn up, which constrains space for financial policies. Some countries (for example, Argentina and India) should remain watchful of inflationary pressures and cannot afford to lower interest rates further. In Brazil, policymakers should stand ready to start unwinding monetary stimulus as the recovery proceeds in order to securely anchor inflation expectations. Room for monetary easing may also be limited where a strong credit expansion continues or where currencies are undervalued. If needed to support demand, fiscal policy— provided space is available—may be the appropriate tool in such cases. 