Comprehensive and ambitious consolidation plans and entitlement reform are instrumental given tradeoffs facing fiscal policy. In the United States, agreement on a credible fiscal roadmap could help create some short-term policy space, mitigate risks of excessive near-term consolidation, and ease the burden currently placed on monetary policy. In Japan, the recent fiscal stimulus makes developing a credible fiscal plan that stabilizes and reduces debt even more urgent. Progress on medium-term fiscal reform would also help quell concerns about political pressure on central banks to keep interest rates too low longer than warranted, given the massive purchases by various central banks of government paper since 2008. It will create greater scope to pursue supportive monetary policy without triggering concern about central bank independence or a resurgence of inflation. Monetary policy should remain accommodative but mindful of new and evolving risks. Minimal room remains to lower policy rates in key advanced economies, except the euro area, and monetary transmission may be hindered by the state of the financial sector. Better central bank communications may help bring down real interest rates and provide added support to demand, including by reassuring markets against premature tightening. Japan’s newly announced easing measures to achieve a new 2 percent inflation target within 2 years are welcome but they need to be accompanied by ambitious growth and fiscal strategies to reduce risks and ensure sustained recovery that benefits Japan and other economies. Central bank purchases of assets, long-term refinancing operations, and other interventions in financial markets are helping to reduce funding costs and strengthen confidence, but there may be worsening tradeoffs, including credit misallocation. Policymakers should employ appropriate macro- and micro-prudential tools to mitigate such outcomes. Central banks must decide what more, if anything, to do and prepare for an eventual exit from unconventional monetary policies. Financial policies need to secure stability and support recovery. The reform agenda is unfinished and needs to be reinvigorated to strengthen the global financial system. Further action is needed to recapitalize, restructure, or resolve weak banks and improve the flow of credit to the economy, particularly in Europe. This would help pass- through of monetary accommodation. Like fiscal policy, the pace of financial reform to safeguard stability—such as higher capital and liquidity buffers—should be carefully calibrated to support bank lending and real growth, while avoiding unnecessary delays that can be a source of regulatory uncertainty that can deter the willingness to lend. Consistent implementation and international cooperation is also critical for a level playing field and reducing fragmentation. Capital inflows may require adjustments to the policy mix. Policymakers must remain alert to overheating risks as well as rising domestic financial vulnerabilities. Monetary policy tightening may encourage these flows, which will boost credit and thus reduce its effectiveness. Economies with external surpluses should provide room for monetary tightening by allowing currencies to appreciate, while economies with external deficits may need to consider tightening macroprudential measures or using capital flow management measures in conjunction with monetary tightening. These economies should also consider greater emphasis on fiscal tightening. 