More policy ambition and cooperation are needed to achieve the G-20’s shared objectives of strong, sustainable, and balanced growth. The problems facing the global economy are complex and joint action can help. In an environment of ongoing but incomplete transition to financial stability, changing growth dynamics and concerns about slow growth and high unemployment, achieving a better policy mix is important. A heavy reliance on unconventional monetary policy (UMP), for example, has had overall positive effects and has bought time but needs support from other policies to succeed. Widespread financial, fiscal, and structural impediments need to be addressed to bolster growth and financial stability. In advanced economies, while exceptional monetary accommodation, including through UMP, continues to provide important support to the recovery, potential side effects should be monitored closely and addressed as needed. Clear communication of central bank intentions is vital to help avoid new financial excesses or abrupt reversals of capital flows. There is scope for better cooperation on withdrawal of UMP, especially through wider central bank discussions of exit plans. At the same time, progress on other fronts is crucial. In particular, implementing a measured pace of fiscal tightening (based on a consolidation mix that is supportive of medium- term growth) including entitlement reform remains central. This should be anchored by credible plans for debt reduction—notably, for the United States and Japan. For economies not under market pressure, achieving structural fiscal targets and allowing automatic stabilizers to play freely is key. In the euro area, bank balance sheet repair remain essential to restore confidence and revive credit growth, and policymakers should make further progress on banking union through a Single Supervisory Mechanism and a Single Resolution Mechanism, and advance structural reforms. Additional unconventional monetary support (targeted long term refinancing operations, lower collateral haircuts) could also help reduce fragmentation and restore monetary transmission. In emerging economies, cyclical positions and vulnerabilities vary across countries, with some facing more intense market pressures, and policy responses will need to be country specific. In general, policy responses should be anchored by sound and credible monetary policy frameworks. allow exchange rate adjustment. and pursue structural reforms to boost jobs and growth, with the appropriate country-specific policy mix depending on their respective circumstances. In particular: Monetary policy responses, more generally, to external pressures will depend on country conditions and frameworks. Cyclical weakening calls for monetary policy easing, or less tightening, for those economies where inflation and expectations are well anchored to provide room for maneuver. Where still high inflationary pressures persist, including from supply bottlenecks (for example, Brazil, India, and Indonesia), the scope for easing the monetary stance may be very limited or it may need to be tightened. and more efforts to better anchor expectations may be required where strong nominal anchors are not well established. 