Monetary policy should remain accommodative in advanced economies, as output gaps are large and fiscal consolidation will continue. Emerging economies need to rebuild policy space and in some cases address domestic imbalances and vulnerabilities to prepare for tighter financial conditions. Further actions, including structural reforms, and cooperation are needed across the membership to lay the foundations for stronger and more balanced medium-term growth. Monetary policy should continue supporting demand given the still-large output gaps and ongoing fiscal consolidation. With prospects improving, it will be critical to avoid a premature withdrawal of monetary policy accommodation, including in the United States. There is scope for better cooperation on unwinding UMP, especially through wider central bank discussions of exit plans. In the euro area, more monetary easing is needed to raise the prospects of achieving the ECB’s inflation objective, including by supporting demand, given the weak and fragile growth, large output gaps and very low inflation. Further actions could include longer- term LTROs (possibly targeted to SMEs), and further rate cuts, including mildly negative deposit rates, to support demand and reduce fragmentation. But it would be critical to repair bank balance sheets to reduce financial fragmentation, improve the monetary transmission mechanism, and allow for a sustained recovery in investment. A sound execution of the AQR and stress tests will be a key step toward reducing uncertainty about the health of banks and enabling balance sheet repair. In order to enhance the credibility of the exercise and make it easier to raise private capital, greater clarity is needed on the availability of public backstops as safety nets. National authorities should commit to provide sufficient national backstops, while the establishment of a common backstop (ESM direct recapitalization) remains crucial to sever sovereign-bank links in countries where debt dynamics are a concern and fiscal space is limited. Completing the banking union is also critical to reducing financial fragmentation. In particular, a Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) based on an independent centralized authority, with efficient resolution powers— supported by a single resolution fund—would be necessary to ensure least cost and timely resolution. The recent Council agreement on the SRM is a step forward but the process appears complex, and may cause delays in decision making. A quicker transition period for the mutualization of national contributions to the single resolution fund and a clearer decision on a common backstop and its timing are required to adequately break sovereign-bank links. In the euro area, the overall fiscal stance planned for 2014 is neutral, although a number of countries are still tightening, even if at a slower pace. This is broadly appropriate. However, if low growth persists and monetary policy options are depleted, the flexibility in the current fiscal framework may need to be used to respond in these circumstances. Further progress is also needed in improving national fiscal governance in the context of recent fiscal institutions reforms in the euro area. Credible macroeconomic policies and frameworks, alongside exchange rate flexibility are needed to weather the turbulence. Emerging economies face both near-term and medium-term challenges to support growth. In the near term, priorities include:  weathering the current turbulence and capital outflows and  choosing counter-cyclical policy to close output gaps where possible, or the unavoidable pro-cyclical policies for those lacking policy space/credibility. The strengthening of the recovery and unwinding of accommodative monetary policy in advanced economies will lead to tighter external financing conditions and could generate further bouts of volatility in capital flows. As recent turbulences have shown, economies with deteriorating macroeconomic imbalances, larger external funding requirements (relative to reserves) and lower policy credibility see more volatility. And when risk sentiment changes against EMs indiscriminately, having the policy space and credibility to react has been critical. Policy priorities are thus for a coherent macroeconomic policy mix with a credible nominal anchor and good communication. Specifically: On the monetary front, economies where inflation is still relatively high, or where policy credibility has come into question, need to continue tightening monetary policy in the context of strengthened policy frameworks (India and Turkey).  