Advanced economies should maintain supportive policies, given still substantial output gaps and below-target inflation. Fiscal policy should be growth friendly, including by increasing infrastructure investment. In many emerging market economies, macroeconomic policy space to support growth remains limited, but lower oil prices will alleviate inflationary pressures, allowing for a more gradual tightening of monetary policy. For oil exporters, the need to adjust fiscal stance would depend on the scope of savings from past higher prices of oil and exchange rate regimes. For countries with less policy space, exchange rate flexibility will be a critical buffer to the shock. Lower oil prices offer an opportunity to reform energy subsidies and taxes in both oil exporters and importers. There is an urgent need for structural reforms to raise potential output in both advanced and emerging economies. While lower oil prices should boost domestic demand, accommodative monetary conditions remain essential in most advanced economies, given still sizable output gaps. In most advanced economies, output gaps are still substantial, inflation is below target, and monetary policy remains constrained by the zero lower bound. The boost to demand from lower oil prices is thus welcome. Central banks should be mindful that further declines in inflation, even if temporary, may lead to additional downdraft in inflation expectations and rising real interest rates. This suggests that central banks should be particularly vigilant to signs of pass-through from oil prices to core inflation, which may require early action in economies with already low inflation. The unbalanced recovery across economies suggests that low inflation would pose challenges to central banks, although to a different degree. In the United States, lower oil prices contribute positively to the recovery and there is a strong case to abstract from the effects of temporary oil supply shocks unless they translate into second round effects in wage and price settings (for example a persistent decline in longer term inflation expectations)﴿. The Fed’s employment and inflation objectives should guide policy decisions and the beginning of normalization of the monetary policy stance, which is currently expected around mid-2015. In Japan, the implementation of the Bank of Japan’s (BoJ) October announcement of expanded Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) framework by accelerating purchases of JGBs (and extending their maturity) and tripling the purchases of private assets remains critical to support domestic demand. These monetary measures need to be supplemented by progress on ‘third arrow’ structural reforms. Macro-prudential tools should be the first line of defense against financial stability risks. Following a long period of low rates, excessive risk-taking may have built in some sectors— credit booms in a number of smaller advanced economies and the underpricing of risks in certain segments of United States financial markets. Deploying macro-prudential tools to limit financial risks— which in some cases may require changes to regulatory and legal structures—can reduce the need for monetary policy response to financial stability concerns. It will also make systemic institutions more resilient, help contain pro-cyclical asset price and credit dynamics, and cushion the consequences of liquidity squeezes if volatility spikes. International cooperation is needed to achieve more orderly resolution across borders and consistent regulatory frameworks and supervision. In some emerging economies, lower oil prices may alleviate inflationary pressures and reduce vulnerabilities. This would allow for monetary policy to be tightened more gradually or by less than otherwise required. The scope to do so will require credible macroeconomic policies and frameworks, which has proven essential in coping with volatile financial conditions in the past. Nonetheless, some economies (for example, Turkey) that rely heavily on private external financing will need to proactively further adjust policies. Some economies (Brazil, India, South Africa, Turkey) need to maintain the course of fiscal consolidation, given large fiscal deficits and high inflation in some cases, and high external borrowing that has increased exposure to external funding risks in others. For oil exporters, the optimal policy response to the sharp decline in prices will depend on the buffers accumulated during the years of high oil revenue and exchange rate regimes. Many exporters for which oil receipts typically contribute to a sizable share of fiscal revenues are experiencing large shocks in proportion to their economies. In some economies that have accumulated substantial savings from past higher prices and have fiscal space can let fiscal deficits increase temporarily and draw on these funds to allow for a more gradual adjustment of public spending (for example, Saudi Arabia). In economies where adjustment is unavoidable, allowing exchange rate depreciation will be a critical buffer to cushion the impact of the shock (for example, Russia), which highlights the challenges faced by oil exporters with fixed exchange rate regimes (for example, Venezuela, Ecuador). Some will have to strengthen their monetary frameworks to avert the possibility that depreciation will lead to persistently higher inflation and further depreciation, and to adapt to the prospects of a protracted deterioration in terms of trade. Efforts to increase revenue mobilization and improve expenditure prioritization should continue. Given the deterioration in the inflation and economic outlook and risks of stagnation, the need for a comprehensive strategy to boost growth is particularly relevant in the euro area and Japan. The recent additional monetary easing is welcome, and further progress is needed in addressing structural weaknesses and improving the quality of fiscal adjustment. Sustaining the recovery will require structural reforms to raise potential growth along with demand support. 