To secure a strong and durable recovery, policies need a decisive upgrade. Raising both actual and potential output through a combination of demand support and structural reforms remains a key policy objective. In advanced economies, accommodative monetary policy remains essential. Fiscal policy should be more supportive where conditions allow, even as credible medium-term budget plans are put in place. Many emerging economies have limited scope for monetary and fiscal policy to support growth, with inflation still above target in some economies, and fiscal positions weaker than desirable in others. Where feasible, exchange rate flexibility should serve as a shock absorber, with a temporary role for both intervention and capital flow management measures when market conditions turn disorderly. Joint efforts by deficit and surplus economies to rebalance global demand would reduce excess external imbalances while sustaining growth. Helping China in its difficult transition will also reduce tail risks and facilitate stronger, more durable global growth. Collective effort is also required to further enhance global safety nets and strengthen the International Monetary System. Accommodative monetary policies remain essential in many advanced economies, given still sizable output gaps and low inflation. With nominal policy rates still at or close to the zero lower bound in many economies, monetary policy must remain accommodative, including through unconventional measures, to reduce risks to activity from low inflation and prolonged weak demand. Accommodative monetary policies should be accompanied by efforts to strengthen balance sheets and credit supply, and by active macroprudential measures that address financial stability risks. In the United States, the main near-term policy question is the appropriate timing and pace of monetary policy normalization. The Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC) decision should remain data-dependent, with the first increase in the federal funds rate waiting until continued strength in the labor market is accompanied by firm signs of inflation rising steadily toward the Federal Reserve’s 2 percent medium-term inflation objective. An effective monetary policy communication strategy will remain essential, particularly in an environment of higher financial market volatility. In the euro area, the ECB’s expanded asset purchase program has supported confidence and eased financial conditions, but inflation remains low. A strong commitment to fully implement the asset purchase program and adjust the program if needed will help meet ECB’s price stability objective. These monetary policy efforts should be supported by measures to strengthen bank balance sheets and thereby improve monetary policy transmission and credit market conditions. Stricter treatment of nonperforming loans and measures to improve insolvency and foreclosure procedures are a priority in this regard. In Japan, the Bank of Japan should stand ready for further easing, preferably by extending purchases under its quantitative and qualitative monetary easing program to longer-maturity assets. The Bank of Japan should move to a more forecast-oriented monetary policy communication mode to increase the transparency of its price assessments and signal its commitment to the inflation target. At a global level, there is a pressing need to complete and implement the regulatory reform agenda. Advanced economies should strengthen regulation and supervision of financial activities outside the banking system which are expanding rapidly. In emerging market economies, solid policy frameworks will be crucial. Collective efforts to enhance the global safety net and strengthen the resilience of the International Monetary System (IMS) should be renewed. Past steps to strengthen the policy dialogue on global imbalances, to manage capital flows, and to broaden the global financial safety net have been important. However, the global financial safety net remains underused during periods of turbulence, with uneven access and a multilayered structure (for example, regional financing arrangements, bilateral swap lines, and Fund financing). More coordination is necessary to avoid fragmentation. Episodes of volatile capital flows and exchange rates, along with continuing precautionary reserve accumulation, also suggest the need for further collective efforts to strengthen the IMS. Specifically, implementing the 2010 quota and governance reforms, including their forward-looking elements, is imperative to provide the resources, credibility, and legitimacy the Fund needs to play an effective role in overseeing the IMS. 