Monetary policy should remain accommodative where inflation rates are still well below target. In the United States, following the increase of the federal funds rate in mid-December, further actions should be well-communicated and based on clear evidence of wage or price pressures and an assessment that inflation is set to rise steadily toward the Federal Reserve’s two percent medium-term objective. In the euro area, the ECB’s asset purchase program has supported the recovery by improving confidence and financial conditions. But with inflation remaining low, the ECB should continue to signal strongly its willingness to use all the instruments available until its price stability mandate is met. Moreover, QE should be supported by a more balanced policy mix comprising fiscal support, balance sheet repair, and structural reforms. In Japan, the introduction of negative deposit rates by the BoJ underscores its commitment to maintain inflation momentum. To benefit most from the additional easing, it should be supported with fiscal, structural, and ambitious incomes policies. Building on recent achievements, the authorities should aim for sustained wage inflation, supported by higher public sector and minimum wages, alongside labor market reforms that reduce duality. 
To avoid over-reliance on monetary policy, near-term fiscal policy should support the recovery where appropriate and provided there is fiscal space, focusing on investment. Where public debt is high, commitments to credible medium-term consolidation plans can create policy space. Where necessary, fiscal consolidation should remain growth-friendly and support policies that foster innovation and productivity, while protecting the most vulnerable. In the United States, while the recent bipartisan fiscal agreements was an important positive step, further fiscal efforts are needed to stabilize the debt-to-GDP ratio in the medium-term as interest rates gradually increase and the demographic transition intensifies. An early agreement on credible medium-term deficit reduction would provide the space to fund investments in infrastructure, to raise productivity and innovation, and enhance workers’ skills. In the euro area, countries with fiscal space should do more to support growth—for example, through infrastructure investment in Germany. Swift implementation—and an expansion—of the EU scheme to provide public and private investment would raise growth in the short and medium-term and have positive spillovers in the region. Temporary costs related to refugee expenditures should generally be accommodated, and the compatibility with current fiscal targets assessed on a case-by-case basis. In Japan, a commitment to fiscal consolidation centered on a pre-announced path of gradual consumption tax hikes and a strengthening of fiscal institutions would create near-term policy space to maintain growth momentum. 
In Japan, incomes policies and structural reforms that raise productivity are vital to tackle medium-term risks coming from continuing lackluster growth and the overburdening of monetary policy. Structural reforms should focus on boosting labor supply, including by women and foreigners, reforming labor markets to remove duality, and deregulating further product and services markets. 
In emerging economies, managing vulnerabilities and rebuilding resilience are high priorities in a context of tightening external financial conditions. An effective response requires strengthening supervision and macro-prudential frameworks, as well as addressing corporate and banking sector vulnerabilities. Those commodity exporters that still have fiscal buffers should use them to smooth the adjustment to lower commodity prices. Many countries, however, will need to plan for fiscal adjustment, including through reduced but more efficient public expenditures and stronger fiscal frameworks, mobilizing new sources of revenues, as well as new growth models. Exchange rate flexibility can usefully cushion the impact of adverse external shocks, provided that the effects of currency depreciations on balance sheets and domestic inflation rates are contained. While net commodity importers benefit from reduced inflation pressures and external vulnerabilities, the scope for monetary policy easing could be limited in a context tighter external financing conditions. More specifically: In India, while external vulnerabilities have moderated and inflation has fallen faster than expected, persistently high inflation expectations and large fiscal deficits remain key macroeconomic challenges. The monetary policy stance needs to remain tight to ensure a durable reduction in inflation and inflation expectations. Fiscal consolidation should continue, underpinned by comprehensive tax reform and further reductions in subsidies. Vulnerabilities in corporate financial positions and public bank asset quality could threaten financial stability if left unaddressed. In Brazil, an appropriate macroeconomic policy mix and restored policy frameworks are imperative for a turnaround in confidence and investment once major political uncertainties are resolved. The government should pursue fiscal consolidation by addressing rigidities and unsustainable mandates on the spending side, including in the social security system, and through tax measures and discretionary spending cuts to bolster fiscal results in the short run. The reduction in inflation toward the 4.percent target by 2017 will require a tight monetary policy stance. In Russia, given the magnitude of the negative shock to revenues from lower oil prices, some spending adjustment is necessary in 2016, and fiscal consolidation should continue over the subsequent medium-term. Reestablishing the three-year fiscal framework around a revised oil price rule would help reduce policy uncertainty and support the adjustment. The recent pause in monetary policy easing has been appropriate given the risks to inflation from ruble depreciation, external risks, and the need to build credibility under the newly introduced inflation targeting regime.  
