Sustainably higher and inclusive growth requires more forceful and comprehensive policies. With multiple interdependent factors holding back growth, policymakers have to work all necessary levers— structural policies (including to promote financial stability and trade), fiscal policies, and monetary policy. Depending on country needs, comprehensive action will combine structural reforms with demand support, anchored by coherent and well-communicated policy frameworks. Where interest rates are at or near their effective lower bounds, fiscal policy must play a larger role. At the same time, policymakers can raise confidence by explaining to citizens the benefits of reform and, where necessary, providing effective support to those who disproportionately shoulder the burden of adjustment. Efforts to advance global trade integration, lower financial stability risks, and address geopolitical spillovers remain vital. Structural reforms—prioritized to maximize impact and combined with complementary macroeconomic policies when needed—are essential. Recent IMF research shows that structural reforms are most effective when they directly address an economy’s known structural policy gaps and take account of its level of development, its position in the business cycle, and the available macroeconomic policy space. For example, some labor market reforms benefit employment more when demand is already strong—as this helps job seekers find work faster—or when fiscal and monetary policies can provide support. Other measures, such as lowering barriers for new firms to enter product and services markets, tend to have immediate demand benefits by raising investment and are, therefore, less dependent on the state of the business cycle. The IMF prepared detailed country-by-county recommendations along these lines on the occasion of the Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors’ Meetings in July 2016. 5 A combination of structural reforms and more expansionary demand policies in surplus economies can also help reduce global external imbalances. Several policies can be deployed now to support reforms and contain risks. Where demand is still lacking, there is scope for macroeconomic policies to help short-term growth while advancing the impact of structural reforms. In Europe, the resolution of non-performing loans should be accelerated through a combination of stricter supervision, insolvency reform, and the facilitation of secondary markets in distressed debt. This process will benefit from continuing macroeconomic support—including, for example, through the use of tax incentives and by providing protection for vulnerable households. Safeguarding banking system stability is also a priority. In Japan, the recently announced additional fiscal stimulus is set to boost demand (along with expansionary monetary policy), but it also provides an opportunity to accelerate the impact of much-needed structural reforms, in particular in the labor market. In many emerging markets, financial market reforms have the potential to assist the effective transmission of monetary policies while allowing for sustainable credit expansions. Where inflation is still well below targets, monetary policy should remain expansionary, using all available instruments—for example, in Japan and the euro area. In the United Kingdom, a range of recent monetary and other policy measures by the Bank of England will support the economy and thereby mitigate downside risks. In the United States, monetary policy should continue to remain data-dependent, while downside risks to the outlook confirm the case for a very gradual upward path for the federal funds rate. Where monetary policy operates near or at the lower bound, growth-friendly fiscal policy has an important role to play. Indeed, a strategy of deploying all available tools can counter damaging perceptions that the policy space to use individual instruments might be limited. Taking advantage of the current low interest rate environment and depending on the availability of fiscal space, there is a case for more public investment. Other helpful measures include adjusting the composition of spending toward public investment and moving the revenue structure toward indirect and other taxes relatively less detrimental to growth. In a number of countries, it may be appropriate to devote fiscal resources to reduce private sector debt overhangs and repair financial sector balance sheets. Macroeconomic policies are most effective when deployed within coherent frameworks. It is crucial that fiscal frameworks limit long-run public sector balance sheet risks, while allowing for counter-cyclical demand support and rising deficits when the economy is weak, but ensuring that fiscal space is rebuilt when growth is robust. Credible monetary frameworks that anchor long-run inflation expectations can accommodate spikes in inflation rates over the short to medium-term. In this context, the recent formal adoption of a symmetrical inflation target by India should provide a robust institutional foundation for maintaining price stability. Where inflation targeting frameworks are already established, improving the transparency of instruments and policy objectives can provide further assurance that contractionary shocks will be absorbed. 