The overall pace of policy adjustment and removal of financial support will depend on the strength of recovery in private demand in each country and enduring financial stability. This suggests that the timing of exits will be country specific, although coordination on some specific fronts is desirable. For most countries, fiscal consolidation should be a top priority, with monetary policy able to adjust more flexibly to achieve a desired level of overall stimulus. The scale of fiscal adjustment required is large to ensure debt sustainability and to restore room for policy maneuver, particularly in advanced economies. Fiscal reforms that have long-term effects but that do not affect the economic recovery in the short-term (such as entitlement reforms) should thus be implemented soon to enhance credibility. Current differences in monetary policy conditions could give rise to larger capital inflows to emerging market countries, accentuating the need for policies to encourage rebalancing the global sources of demand. The principles laid out below are intended to establish common ground for the design and implementation of policies during the exit from extraordinary support measures taken during the crisis. Exit strategies should pave the way for strong, stable and balanced economic growth. This needs to be based on price and financial stability, fiscal and debt sustainability, central bank independence, and structural reforms to enhance growth, including new approaches to financial regulation and enhanced supervision. The achievement of sustained economic growth requires that the role of the public sector in the economy, including in the financial sector, be restored to one that supports private and market based financial intermediation. Market based principles and pricing also can play a role in reducing the use of support measures prior to their full removal. Principle 2: With some exceptions, fiscal consolidation should be a top policy priority. monetary policy is more easily able to adjust to achieve the desired level of overall stimulus. Commentary: Achieving fiscal sustainability will be a complex process and will take longer than normalizing monetary policy. Monetary policy can respond more quickly to achieve the desired level of overall stimulus, when fiscal retrenchment begins. The strategy for fiscal consolidation should be outlined and communicated now. Deficit-reducing and debt management measures should commence as soon as private demand begins recovering. This is advisable considering both the relative scales of policy adjustment required and managing risks to both economic and financial recovery: For most countries, the risks presented by keeping stimulus in place too long suggest that adjustment is a key priority. Maintaining fiscal stimulus longer than needed has obvious and immediate consequences for debt accumulation. In many advanced economies, monetary policy can afford to remain accommodative for an extended period, given subdued price pressures. In a number of emerging economies, by contrast, monetary policy may have to tighten sooner—and might therefore be more synchronous with or even lead fiscal consolidation—if there are signs of rising inflation or incipient financial vulnerabilities, including credit booms. The challenges of placing fiscal policy on a sustainable path—both political and economic—are greater than for normalizing monetary policy. The scale of fiscal adjustment required to ensure fiscal sustainability will be large, particularly in advanced economies. This suggests that fiscal policy changes that have long-term effects but that do not affect the economic recovery in the short term (such as entitlement reforms and strengthening fiscal frameworks and institutions) should be implemented soon to enhance credibility. Principle 3: Fiscal exit strategies should be transparent, comprehensive, and communicated clearly now, with the goal of lowering public debt to prudent levels within a clearly-specified timeframe. Commentary: A high degree of transparency in fiscal accounts is more important than ever. Requirements include a comprehensive assessment of fiscal risks, including those arising from possible additional support to the financial sector, volatility in interest rates, guarantees, and public-private partnerships. Measures to strengthen the finances and operations of subnational governments and public enterprises may also be needed in some countries. The general government balance should be targeted, as deficits and debts of subnational government institutions have the same macroeconomic and financial solvency effects as those of central governments. Actions to bolster fiscal frameworks and institutions could include reforms of budgetary processes, more frequent and comprehensive reporting requirements, medium-term expenditure frameworks, and fiscal rules. Targeting an appropriate debt ratio of GDP, taking into account longer-term spending pressures, would help build public awareness and address market concerns regarding fiscal sustainability: Stabilizing debt ratios at their likely post-crisis levels will not be sufficient. This is especially true for those economies facing rising pressure on public finances from key entitlement programs and demographic change. High debt ratios would impede fiscal flexibility and raise interest rates. The appropriate debt ratio will need to take country-specific characteristics into account. This includes the composition of the debt (currency and maturity), depth of domestic financial markets, and diversification of the investor base. For many advanced economies, targeting a gradual return to a gross debt ratio below 60 percent (the median level before the crisis) would be appropriate, with reforms of entitlements, other expenditures, and revenues a prerequisite for attaining that target and maintaining it over time. Targets for emerging economies will need to take into account generally lower market tolerance for high public debt. High debt levels require better debt structures (for example, longer, well spread-out maturities). There is also a need to ensure adequate recovery of the value of assets acquired during the crisis, cover any central bank losses, and manage contingent liabilities so as to minimize their realization.2 