Going forward, a strategy to ensure fiscal solvency should be based on:  a firm commitment and a clear strategy to contain aging-related spending, especially in advanced economies. growth-enhancing structural reforms. and  fiscal policies cast within medium-term fiscal frameworks (and supportive institutional arrangements) that envisage a gradual fiscal correction once economic conditions improve.20 Any successful strategy to ensure that public debt is kept on a sustainable path will need to include measures to contain aging-related spending. Under current policies, spending on pensions and health care is projected to increase substantially over the next two decades, especially in the advanced economies. Owing to these pressures, which existed prior to the global financial and economic crisis, attaining a given primary surplus presents greater challenges than in the past. Entitlement reforms in the areas of pensions and health care will play a key role in two respects. First, reforms that reduce the trajectory of aging-related spending can contribute to improving prospects for the primary balance, thereby helping to contain the debt-to-GDP ratio. Second, the extent to which the projected debt-to-GDP ratio is viewed as sustainable depends in part on the outlook for pension and health care expenditures over the longer run. Thus, reforms that improve the long-run outlook would, other things equal, permit a somewhat less ambitious reduction in the debt-to-GDP ratio over the coming years. Medium-term fiscal frameworks can also play a role in recovering from high debt positions.Explicit medium-term fiscal targets would help provide a clear indication of what country authorities perceive as a desirable fiscal policy path. Such targets can help anchor market expectations if they are credibly set and buttressed by appropriate institutional frameworks (for example, medium-term expenditure frameworks that set multi-year limits at the aggregate, ministerial, or program level, in order to translate overall objectives into budget decisions). During the crisis, countries with existing fiscal rules have, for the most part, retained them—in some cases making use of escape clauses—although the crisis has tested their resilience and highlighted the importance of built-in flexibility to avoid tightening during recessions. For instance, the EU’s Stability and Growth Pact has been flexible enough to accommodate the currently envisaged fiscal responses to the crisis.22 