G-20 countries have provided substantial fiscal stimulus, which when fully implemented will have a sizeable impact on growth. Planned crisis-related discretionary measures are estimated at 2 percent of GDP in 2009 and 1.percent of GDP in 2010.A full progress report on implementation of fiscal stimulus packages in G-20 countries to date is difficult, given operational challenges in reporting and limited specific information.In general, however, implementation rates are reported to be higher for revenue measures and social transfers and lower for infrastructure projects. This contributes to cross-country variation in overall implementation, as the composition of stimulus differs by country. The crisis is, however, having a substantial impact on fiscal positions in G-20 countries, with overall deficits projected to increase by 5.percentage points and 5.percentage points of GDP in 2009 and 2010, respectively, from pre-crisis levels. Considerable fiscal stimulus remains in the pipeline through 2010 for the G-20 as a whole, and should be implemented expeditiously to maximize the impact on growth and employment. The stimulus measures implemented most rapidly—tax breaks and transfer payments—typically have lower multipliers. Implementation of higher multiplier items is likely to pick up in the second half of 2009, particularly in infrastructure, suggesting that growth and employment impacts could increase during the remainder of the year. Estimated growth impacts range from 1.to 4.percentage points in 2009 and from zero to 0.percentage points in 2010, both with respect to the previous year. Going forward, a strategy to ensure fiscal solvency should be articulated. This should be based on:  a firm commitment and a clear strategy to contain aging-related spending, especially in advanced economies.  growth-enhancing structural reforms. and  fiscal policies cast within medium-term fiscal frameworks (and supportive institutional arrangements) that envisage a gradual fiscal correction once economic conditions improve. Reforms in the these areas will play a key role by: directly improving prospects for the primary balance, thereby helping to contain the debt-to-GDP ratio. and bolstering confidence in fiscal sustainability, which should help to limit increases in bond yields. Comprehensive medium-term macroeconomic strategies should be announced as soon as is feasible, to anchor expectations in credible paths for debt and deficit reduction. During the crisis, countries with existing fiscal rules (for example the EU’s Stability and Growth Pact) have generally retained them—in some cases making use of escape clauses. The crisis has tested their resilience and highlighted the importance of built-in flexibility. Entitlements reforms need to be put in place now to underpin fiscal sustainability. 