Like financial systems, public finances will need to adjust over the medium-term. Reflecting financial sector support measures, fiscal stimulus packages, and the impact of non-discretionary factors, the debt-to-GDP ratio of the G-20 countries in 2014 is projected to be 22 percentage points above its 2007 level (Figure 5). Most of this increase occurs in the advanced countries, which would see a rise in their debt ratio of 36 percentage points over this period, with more than 4/5 of the increase accounted for by the impact of automatic stabilizers, weaker asset prices, fiscal stimulus and financial sector support measures, and higher interest payments (Table 4). For emerging economies, the projected medium-term debt path is more benign, owing to higher growth. Overall fiscal deficits remain larger in 2014 (even though the output gap is projected to largely close), compared with 2007, by around 21⁄2 percentage points of GDP for the advanced countries and 2 percentage points for the emerging markets. For the advanced countries, this reflects higher interest payments in 2014 (by nearly 2 percentage points of GDP, on average), as well as higher primary expenditures. For the emerging markets, revenue gains in some countries offset sustained lowered commodity revenues (from exceptionally high 2007 levels) in others. Increases in primary expenditures offset modest projected savings on interest payments. Fiscal deficits will need to be consolidated to bring public finance back on a sustainable trajectory, particularly with looming demographic pressures on spending. Against these trends, a natural question is the extent of fiscal adjustment that would be required to return debt-to-GDP ratios to pre-crisis levels. The required adjustment depends on the magnitude of the increase of the debt ratio, how early the adjustment starts, the current primary balance, the growth-adjusted interest rate, and the target year (Table 5).  The later the fiscal adjustment starts, the larger will be the required primary balance to return to the pre-crisis debt-levels. Given the WEO baseline for growth and the debt trajectory, and assuming that adjustment begins in 2011 and takes place over a 10-year period, illustrative calculations suggests that the required primary surplus-to-GDP ratio is 3.percent, requiring an average adjustment of 5.percent of GDP. Delaying the start of adjustment by even one year raises the required primary surplus over the ten-year period to 4.percent of GDP, and the required average adjustment to 5.percent of GDP. There is however significant cross-country variation in the calculations. Faced by prospects of steeply rising public debt ratios, countries will need to develop convincing strategies to ensure fiscal sustainability, something few G-20 countries have done so far. Some are exploring new fiscal rules, such as Germany, which is considering a new constitutional rule for structural balance limits at the federal and state levels. Others are considering less formal, non-binding targets for public debt or deficits that would demand significant sustained adjustment. However, these targets are relatively far in the future. The publication of ten-year fiscal forecasts by the United States is a welcome step, including by increasing transparency. however, projections for growth and interest rates appear optimistic. Where consolidation policies have been mooted, they have focused on increases in taxation of fuel and on making income taxes more progressive, and in some cases on limiting growth of current spending or cutting capital expenditure. Most G-20 countries are counting on a revival of tax revenues and a reversal of discretionary spending initiatives when conditions improve (Table 6). However, it will be difficult to resolve fiscal problems simply by relying on improvements in cyclical revenue, as some of the revenue base may have been lost permanently (for example, from elevated profits in the financial sector or real estate). Also, gains from “unwinding” fiscal and financial support operations are uncertain, as in some countries significant political capital will need to be expended to ensure that stimulus measures do not become permanent. Not renewing stimulus will reduce deficits, but not public debt. Finally, demographic pressures continue to build, with consequences for health and pension outlays and medium- and long-term fiscal sustainability. The strategies should include reforming entitlements, fiscal consolidation, and other structural fiscal reforms: Pension and health care reforms will be critical to address key sources of fiscal pressures over the next few decades. Staff estimates that the net present value of future entitlement spending increases is ten times larger than the fiscal costs of the current crisis. 14 The technical and political groundwork for feasible reform solutions should proceed now, particularly with respect to health reforms, where difficult and complex choices are involved. Action is all the more critical in that progress in one key pillar of a strategy to address these pressures— reducing budget deficits and lowering public debt levels in the short term to make room for future entitlement spending increases—has been undermined by the crisis. Fiscal policy should be complemented by growth-enhancing structural reforms. A one percentage point rise in real GDP growth (assuming constant spending) for 10 years would lower public debt by 24 percent of GDP (at a 40 percent tax rate). Other elements will be important: tax policies should avoid excessive tax competition and a race to the bottom. large potential revenues from carbon taxation (or from cap- and-trade schemes aimed at controlling greenhouse gas emissions) should be developed and channeled at least in part to fiscal consolidation. and governments should ensure adequate recovery of the value of financial assets acquired during the crisis. With fiscal pressures, governments will need to do “more with the same,” if not “more with (perhaps significantly) less.” Improved fiscal policy frameworks— rules, responsibility laws, and councils—could play a role to bolster credibility, depending on country specifics. To avoid an overly abrupt global adjustment at the global level, policies will need to be considered across the G-20 when the time for tightening comes. 