The recent turmoil in euro area debt markets highlights growing market sensitivity to sovereign risks. In most advanced G-20 economies, fiscal tightening will be required in 2011. The challenge for fiscal policy is to reduce public debt while also encouraging growth. Fiscal measures must also be complemented by measures to reduce the fragility of banking systems and by growth-enhancing structural reforms. Greater global policy coordination— especially on crisis resolution mechanisms—is needed to resolve the crisis on a durable basis. The challenge for fiscal policy is to reduce high public debt to prudent levels while also encouraging growth. Fiscal consolidation needs to be anchored by a credible medium-term plan, with adjustment in the near-term depending on country circumstances, particularly the pace of recovery and the risk of a loss of fiscal credibility. In particular, authorities need to avoid both a loss of credibility arising from appearing unable or unwilling to address market concerns about the course of fiscal policy and an excessive tightening of fiscal policy in the near term, as either would have severe implications for growth. It is of overarching importance that G-20 countries commit now to credible medium-term fiscal adjustment plans, which could include legislation creating multi-year targets. In elaborating medium-term fiscal adjustment, legislating reforms to pension entitlements and public health care systems, making permanent reductions in nonentitlement spending, and strengthening fiscal institutions would be imperative. For example, gradual increases in the age of eligibility for pensions would have immediate benefits for fiscal sustainability while allowing households time to adjust to longer expected working lives. Medium-term reforms should also include strengthening fiscal institutions (for example, fiscal rules and medium-term fiscal frameworks) to support a durable fiscal effort. From a near-term perspective, most G-20 advanced economies do not need to tighten before 2011, since this could undermine the fledgling recovery, but they should not add further stimulus. Although specifics will vary by country, current fiscal consolidation plans for this group of countries for 2011—which envisage, on average, an adjustment of about 1¼ percentage points of GDP in the cyclically adjusted balance—are broadly appropriate. Countries currently facing sovereign funding pressures have already begun to embark on immediate fiscal consolidation. Given market pressures, some economies in the euro area will need to tighten fiscal policies more aggressively than expected, including through upfront measures, even if politically difficult. The important consolidation steps taken by a number of these countries will need to be complemented with reform to the euro area fiscal framework, including deficit rules that have credible enforcement mechanisms. Countries that are unable to credibly commit to medium-term consolidation may find that adverse market reaction compels them to undertake significantly more front-loaded adjustment. 