Driven by strong and credible consolidation, public finances would be returned onto a sustainable trajectory in G-20 advanced economies. Credible consolidation plans—designed to be “growth friendly”—would mitigate the dampening effect on domestic demand. Monetary policy accommodation could be maintained for a more extended period to help support activity, since inflation would remain contained as fiscal balances are strengthened. Credible fiscal consolidation over the medium term, underpinned by high-quality measures of sufficient magnitude, should be a top priority in advanced deficit economies given sovereign debt market stress and other fiscal risks. Substantial budgetary effort would be required to restore fiscal soundness and to rebuild market confidence. In this regard, credible and coherent fiscal plans should be clearly communicated as soon as possible. Fund staff assessment of macroeconomic and policy frameworks submitted by G-20 members identified several economic and policy issues and key risks. The assessment found that the G-20 “base case” projections, at face value, appear to deliver strong, sustainable and balanced growth. However, when compared with historical evidence relating to recovery from crises and staff’s analysis in the World Economic Outlook (WEO), growth projections appeared optimistic. Moreover, even assuming that the “base case” scenario materialized, the analysis identified some key weaknesses. In particular, fiscal consolidation was assessed to be insufficient to decisively address sustainability issues in a number of advanced economies. Also, rebalancing of global demand was viewed as not being strong enough to sustain high global growth and achieve low unemployment. Finally, it was assessed that stronger efforts to repair and reform the financial system was needed to support G-20 growth objectives, while safeguarding financial stability. The set of policy options that could strengthen G-20 outcomes would require collaborative action across the membership. The major policy actions considered across the G-20 include: (i) “growth-friendly” fiscal consolidation in advanced economies; (ii) structural reforms (including strengthening social safety nets) and sustained infrastructure spending in emerging surplus economies, accompanied by increased exchange rate flexibility; and (iii) structural reforms in advanced economies to tackle high unemployment and weaker potential output following the crisis. These policy “layers” can be motivated as follows. There is a pressing need, in general, for fiscal consolidation in G-20 advanced economies. In the “base case,” fiscal deficits and debt levels in advanced economies are projected to remain large, notwithstanding favorable macroeconomic outcomes. This could weigh on the recovery and further raise market pressure in an environment of elevated uncertainty about sovereign debt risks. Thus, elements of alternative policy scenarios should consider fiscal consolidation, notably in economies with large fiscal and external deficits. Consolidation plans should be strong, credible, and, to the extent possible, supportive of growth. This would seem to require a sufficient scale of adjustment, more efficient redistribution of the tax burden and allocation of spending, as well as clear and effective communication of credible and coherent fiscal consolidation strategies. FISCAL CONSOLIDATION TO RESTORE SUSTAINABILITY IN ADVANCED ECONOMIES In the upside scenario, fiscal adjustment is underpinned, to the extent possible, by sound and “growth-friendly” policies, underscoring the role of credibility. To restore sustainability of public finances, while mitigating the impact on growth, three core elements of fiscal consolidation would be instrumental: (i) sufficient scale to improve primary fiscal balances to stabilize public debt at prudent levels, given growth and interest rates; (ii) growth-friendly composition of fiscal measures to mitigate the dampening effect on demand, including through entitlement reform; and (iii) strengthened credibility of fiscal plans, including through clear and effective communication to market participants, to align market expectations with the authorities’ medium-term consolidation strategy. Key aspects of each component are elaborated below. To stabilize public debt at prudent levels, the scale of fiscal adjustment would need to be sufficiently strong, accounting for country-specific needs. Major fiscal consolidation is needed in the years ahead in G-20 economies with high public deficits and debt.3 Different economic circumstances and policy needs across advanced economies would determine the timing, magnitude, and composition of consolidation at the individual country level. Reducing public debt to more prudent (for example, pre-crisis) levels over the medium term is desirable for several reasons, including: (i) a need to rebuild fiscal space to deal with future shocks; (ii) possibly higher interest rates and lower potential growth given high public debt; and (iii) the need to prepare for formidable longer-term challenges on public finances— notably, rising health care costs and aging. Accordingly, the assumed fiscal consolidation in the scenario is broadly in line with stabilizing public debt-to-GDP ratios at pre-crisis levels. Total fiscal adjustment in the upside (including what is already in the baseline from G-20 policy frameworks) amounts to approximately 9½ and 6 percent of GDP in advanced deficit and advanced surplus economies, respectively. The first layer of the upside scenario considers the following additional (stylized) budgetary actions (see Box 2): For advanced deficit countries (represented by the United States in the model) as well as some advanced surplus countries (represented by Japan in the model) an additional fiscal deficit reduction of 3 percentage points is phased in over 5 years, reflecting lower government consumption by 1 percent of GDP, lower general government transfers by 1½ percent of GDP, and higher tax revenues by ½ percentage point of GDP.4  To mitigate the dampening effect on demand, the composition of fiscal adjustment would be important. The design of fiscal consolidation plans should be “growth friendly” to the extent possible in terms of its composition. Minimizing tax distortion is a key principle for the design. Within this realm, there are many possible options and an indicative set of policies considered here is as follows. Recognizing that the effect of fiscal consolidation will partly depend on the composition of expenditure and tax instruments, the model examines the impact of: (i) lower taxes on capital and labor; (ii) higher taxes on consumption; and (iii) entitlement reform (through lower transfers) and some cuts in government consumption. Specifically: A shift from payroll to consumption taxes facilitates fiscal consolidation, while increasing medium-term potential output.5 While tax increases may be unavoidable, this should be done in the least distortionary manner possible. For example, a shift from payroll taxes to consumption tax (or VAT depending on country circumstances) facilitates fiscal consolidation by increasing employment and potential output. Other avenues that could be considered (but are outside the model) include eliminating existing tax distortions, including those relating to the treatment of financial leverage or energy consumption. The shift in tax composition—as part of the consolidation—increases overall tax revenues by ½ percent of GDP and is designed as follows (for the United States block in the model): consumption tax revenues increase by 5 percent of GDP (equivalent to an increase in consumption tax rates of about 8 percentage points), while labor and capital income tax revenues decrease by 4½ percent of GDP (equivalent to a cut of 6 percentage points of the underlying effective tax rates). Finally, credibility is a critical element for successful fiscal adjustment. Credibility is defined in terms of what the private sector believes about a certain policy action. With less-than-full credibility of fiscal plans, private expectations anticipate some reversal or slippage in consolidation. If investors and consumers doubt that the package would be fully implemented, investment and employment responses over the near term would be weaker than otherwise. However, if economic agents gain confidence in fiscal implementation, expectations would closely align with the goals of a (fully-credible) consolidation strategy. Then, the growth-enhancing effects (for example, through lower interest rates) of the fiscal package would be realized sooner. Clear and effective communication of coherent consolidation plans and strengthening of budgetary institutions and frameworks would help fiscal credibility visà-vis the private sector. For the upside scenario: Fiscal policies are assumed to steadily gain credibility over time. Where applicable, additional consolidation starting in 2011 is assumed relative to the plans in G-20 policy frameworks; all measures are phased in gradually over 5 years, with policies gaining full credibility by the third year of the consolidation plan (i.e., in 2013). Concretely, private expectations in the model align with the authorities’ fiscal consolidation objectives from this point onwards. The scenario shows that fiscal consolidation alone—while supportive of growth in the medium term—in advanced G-20 economies would dampen growth in the short run, including for G-20 partner countries (Figure 1). For advanced economies, the simulated fiscal consolidation lowers real GDP relative to the baseline, primarily reflecting lower disposable income and aggregate demand. Monetary policy mitigates the slowdown by remaining accommodative longer relative to the baseline. As credibility of fiscal policy increases over time, private spending is increasingly “crowded in.” Investment and employment increase and economic activity gains momentum, resulting in higher real GDP relative to the baseline over the medium term. For emerging Asia and ROW, however, real GDP remains lower relative to the baseline over the projection horizon, given their high export dependence. Weaker external demand (relative to the baseline) from advanced partners more than offsets the benefits of lower interest rates globally. Thus, the case for global rebalancing is strong. More credible fiscal adjustment would mitigate but would not likely reverse the decline in domestic demand in those economies undergoing consolidation. Current account deficits would narrow in advanced deficit countries, matched by lower external surpluses in emerging and advanced surplus countries. The euro area current account would be broadly unchanged, but imbalances within the area would narrow. While global imbalances would narrow, global growth would be lower. This reflects insufficient rebalancing of global demand. Stronger fiscal consolidation would allow monetary accommodation to be maintained for a longer time to help support activity. Owing to large and credible fiscal consolidation, sovereign risk premia and long-term interest rates decline. Combined with the lower capital income taxes, investment is “crowded in,” and the shift away from labor taxes increases employment, boosting the supply potential significantly. Accordingly, monetary policy in advanced economies could afford to stay accommodative for a more extended period, since inflation pressures remain contained and inflation expectations are well anchored. Finally, fiscal actions that lower payroll taxes or other non-wage costs (for example, social security contributions) could also strengthen the employment effect in the upside.  Risks surrounding fiscal sustainability and heightened market concerns have moved front and center. Against the backdrop of recent market developments, higher sovereign interest rate risk premia are a key risk belonging to the downside scenario. Insufficiently credible adjustment plans may result in sharp increases of these risk premia— dampening growth in the affected economies, with an impact on public debt (both directly and indirectly). Moreover, the credibility of (forced) fiscal adjustment would likely be lower in a downside scenario, likely affecting the impact on private spending. Weaker potential output would have adverse implication for fiscal positions. In advanced economies, lower growth than projected in the MAP would result in lower tax revenues, higher-than-projected fiscal deficits, and rising public debt burdens (already at high levels). This could reinforce market concerns about debt sustainability. These two elements constitute key elements of the downside scenario. Fiscal consolidation in the event of deteriorating market sentiment and lower potential output would need to be stronger and more front-loaded to try to reassure markets. On the back of lower potential, public finances would worsen given lower tax revenues and automatic stabilizers, pushing up interest rates with likely adverse feedback effects on growth and confidence. In such an environment, effectiveness of fiscal adjustment would likely be significantly reduced. Compared to the upside scenario, much larger fiscal consolidation would be needed to ensure the sustainability of public finances. Moreover, credibility would be lacking if fiscal adjustment were forced by adverse market reaction, reinforcing (rather than mitigating) negative demand effects. This box discusses a stylized package of fiscal policies designed to achieve fiscal consolidation, while supporting growth over the medium term. The upside scenario explores the role of three core elements of the fiscal consolidation package. In particular: (i) sufficient scale; (ii) growthfriendly composition; and, (iii) strengthened credibility of fiscal plans, along the following lines. The scale and composition of the package should take into account country-specific circumstances. The timing and magnitude of consolidation should be tied to country circumstances. For the purpose of the upside scenario, based on Fund staff assessment of fiscal consolidation needs in each country or region, the (stylized) fiscal package is constructed as follows: For the United States. The fiscal deficit is reduced by 3 percentage points of GDP. To lessen the contractionary effect of the deficit reduction, part of it is financed through a growthsupporting shift in the composition of taxation from income to consumption. Specifically, a reduction in labor and capital income taxes by 4.5 percent of GDP (approximately 6 percentage points cuts in the effective tax rates, each) is more than offset by a 5 percent of GDP increase in consumption tax revenue (i.e., an increase of consumption tax rate by 8 percentage points). The rest of the deficit reduction is financed by cutting government consumption and general government transfers by 1 percent of GDP and 1½ percent of GDP, respectively. Credibility is a critical element for successful fiscal adjustment. Credibility is defined in terms of what the private sector believes about the fiscal policy action. Under partial credibility, markets anticipate some reversal or slippage in consolidation and thus, investment and employment responses over the near term would be weaker than otherwise. However, if economic agents have full credibility in fiscal plans, then, the growth-enhancing effects (for example, through lower interest rates) of the fiscal package would be realized sooner. In the upside scenario, fiscal policies are assumed to steadily gain credibility over time. Where applicable, starting in 2011 additional consolidation is assumed relative to the plans in G-20 policy frameworks; all measures are phased in gradually over 5 years, with policies gaining full credibility by the third year of the consolidation plan (i.e., from 2013 onwards private expectations in the model are aligned with the authorities’ fiscal consolidation objectives in each country). The motivation behind the above fiscal package is to support growth over the medium term. In the near term growth declines slightly relative to the refined baseline due to negative multiplier effects of lower government spending and an initial lack of credibility. However, the policy measures boost growth significantly over the medium term for two reasons. First, lower deficits increase saving and thus, reduce real interest rates over time. Second, with the supply of labor and capital relatively elastic over the longer term, while consumption demand is relatively inelastic, a shift of the tax burden towards consumption reduces distortions, and, therefore boosts output. 