Fiscal consolidation is an essential part of internal rebalancing. At the Toronto Summit, G-20 Leaders in advanced economies agreed to halve fiscal deficits by 2013 and to stabilize or reduce public debt by 2016. Overall, G-20 fiscal policies appear broadly on track to meet the Toronto commitments, but medium-term consolidation plans for some countries rely on relatively optimistic growth assumptions and very few countries have thus far articulated credible plans underpinned by specific measures in key areas. Responding to severe market pressure earlier this year, notably concerning sovereign risks, some advanced deficit economies have announced or brought forward fiscal consolidation plans.2 Plans differ across countries both in magnitude and pace of adjustment, reflecting the strength of economic recovery, the amount of fiscal space, and the reaction of markets to the strength of public balance sheets. In many cases, consolidation plans are accompanied by measures to increase transparency of the budget process. Many advanced surplus economies have also announced consolidation plans, but the degree of specificity in identifying measures vary significantly. In many countries, fiscal consolidation over the medium-term is to be achieved through entitlement and tax system reforms and “pay-go” principles. In some cases, new measures to bolster the credibility of public finances have been established or planned, including mechanisms to identify risks in federal and state budgets and to reform the fiscal framework. Some emerging deficit economies have begun fiscal tightening and announced medium-term consolidation plans. In many cases, the broad measures are dependent upon the pace and durability of economic recovery, and consolidation plans lack sufficient specificity to anchor credibility. Large oil-exporting economies have also committed to some consolidation, though budgets retain an emphasis on public investment. In these economies, increased non-oil infrastructure spending is aimed at relieving supply bottlenecks and sustaining growth with less dependence on oil prices. Notwithstanding progress, central policy challenges are to formulate clear, credible, and ambitious medium-term plans. Medium-term plans need to be underpinned by specific commitments in critical areas—including entitlement and tax reforms that are supportive of growth. Stronger governance and budgetary institutions in many cases would strengthen such efforts, which will need to be sustained. Beyond the MAP framework, long-term fiscal plans to restore sustainability of public finances will be required to rebuild policy space and to address long-run budgetary pressures. To reach the G-20’s fiscal objectives specified in Toronto, more fiscal effort is needed in some countries. Real GDP growth in a consistent G-20 baseline is lower than that assumed in individual members’ submissions in some cases. This would result in higher fiscal deficits than otherwise (i.e., at unchanged policies). In order to halve the 2010 fiscal deficit by 2013, added fiscal effort is required (text table). An ambitious implementation of the Toronto Declaration is assumed here based on stabilizing net (rather than gross) debt ratios by 2016. Consequently, further fiscal consolidation in advanced economies is considered as a “second layer” to help restore soundness of public finances. The magnitude of the additional fiscal effort is based on the path of fiscal balances that is consistent with growth in the revised G-20 baseline (see Box IV.2). The improvements in fiscal balances are assumed to be sustained to reduce public debt.11 Specifically, fiscal adjustment along the following key dimensions are considered:  