In many G-20 countries, restoring fiscal sustainability is a top priority and policy challenge, notably in light of the surge in government debt levels. Ensuring fiscal sustainability depends on ensuring growth, and so the provision of fiscal support will need to be maintained until there are clear signs of a self-sustaining recovery. But beyond that, fiscal consolidation will need to gain rapid momentum, notably in advanced economies. Some major emerging economies will also need to return to medium-term fiscal considerations as the recovery is established. In many advanced G-20 economies, substantial consolidation will be needed to ensure fiscal sustainability, foster medium-and-long-term growth and restore fiscal space for future needs. This is particularly important for the United States, given its systemically important role in global financial markets, but also for other advanced economies that can affect the sovereign risk premiums of other countries. Against this backdrop, exiting from fiscal stimulus should in general take priority over other policies, particularly in advanced economies. In sequencing an exit from crisis-related policies, fiscal policy should generally take priority. Maintaining an expansionary fiscal stance has a direct impact on the build-up of debt. Accommodative monetary policy does not have such automatic consequences and can be reversed quickly. in the current juncture, inflationary pressures appear well contained. Furthermore, fiscal policy adjustment typically has a long lead time relative to monetary policy. Hence, plans for fiscal consolidation should generally take priority, all else given. In many advanced G-20 economies, authorities will need to urgently devise and communicate credible medium-term fiscal policy strategies. These strategies should include: Clear timeframes to reduce gross debt-to-GDP ratios to sustainable levels. To return debt ratios in advanced economies to relatively more prudent levels—for example, 60 percent of advanced-economy GDP by 2030 (the median level of debt in advanced economies prior to the crisis)—requires adjustment of the order of 8.percentage points of GDP in the next ten years. Fiscal measures that seek to increase economies’ medium-run growth potentials. Winding down fiscal stimulus measures will provide only about 2 percent of GDP. additional fiscal measures will therefore be needed. Entitlement reforms and improvements to tax and expenditure policies could help attain fiscal sustainability, while promoting medium-run growth. Strong fiscal policy frameworks and institutions with comprehensive coverage of the public sector. Formally adopting or strengthening fiscal rules with explicit fiscal targets and monitoring by independent fiscal agencies could help shore up the necessary broad consensus, anchoring expectations and guiding fiscal policy implementation over the medium-term. 