Collaborative policies that support a rebalancing of global demand are crucial to secure strong, sustainable, and balanced growth. In advanced economies, two key policy priorities—financial sector reform and credible medium-term fiscal consolidation—are central to catalyzing a pickup in private demand. External rebalancing will require reforms aimed at boosting domestic demand in emerging surplus economies, notably through greater exchange rate flexibility. Fiscal policies must increasingly address medium-term requirements to enable debt sustainability. A key priority is for policymakers to further specify and begin implementing medium-term consolidation plans to help achieve sustainable fiscal positions. Successful fiscal adjustment will require that medium-term consolidation plans are accompanied by structural reforms that raise the trend level of growth and thus support long-term fiscal solvency. Fiscal consolidation in advanced economies should begin in 2011, but the type and speed of adjustment should reflect different circumstances in different countries, especially in terms of the pace of recovery and risks to fiscal credibility. On the whole, country consolidation plans for 2011 strike an appropriate balance between making a credible start toward strengthening public finances and continuing to support the recovery. If growth risks to slow appreciably more than expected, some of the planned consolidation could be slowed or postponed in countries with more fiscal room. Monetary policy must remain the first line of defense, although this line is becoming increasingly thin in most advanced economies. In all but the most vulnerable countries, automatic stabilizers should be allowed to operate fully and, where stabilizers are small, temporary support (such as extended unemployment benefits or wage subsidies) could be continued. Medium-term consolidation plans should emphasize policy measures that reform rapidly growing spending programs—such as pensions and public health care—and make permanent reductions to non-entitlement spending, with a view to improving labor supply and investment. Moderate adjustments to current policies, such as increasing the retirement age, may entail no effect on demand in the short-run but can have large beneficial effects on fiscal sustainability. Strengthening fiscal institutions, through improved budgetary processes, better fiscal monitoring, and, in the EU, improved governance frameworks, can play important roles in consolidation. Credible medium-term consolidation in advanced economies may allow more fiscal room, alleviating the need for accommodative monetary policy and reducing large and potentially unstable flows to emerging economies. 