In the major advanced G-20 economies there will be a need for continued policy stimulus until private demand gathers sustainable momentum, as the recovery will remain sluggish and fragile, notwithstanding the recent uptick in growth prospects. Central banks should maintain low interest rates for some time, given that underlying inflation is expected to remain subdued and unemployment high through 2010. Fiscal policies need to remain supportive of economic activity in the near term, and the fiscal stimulus planned for 2010 should be implemented fully. The fiscal impulse should start to be withdrawn in 2011, except in those economies where markets are rapidly losing confidence in fiscal sustainability and where tightening should start earlier. In the context of high unemployment, there may be merit in considering new policy initiatives aimed at boosting job creation in some countries. However, such measures should be cast within a framework that ensures sound medium-term fiscal balances. In most advanced G-20 economies, ensuring fiscal sustainability is a key priority and policy challenge, notably in light of the surge in government debt levels. Maintaining an expansionary fiscal stance has a clear and direct impact on the build-up of debt. Maintaining an accommodative monetary policy stance, which can be reversed quickly, has few obvious direct downsides. the most important risk from this policy stance in the current low inflationary environment is the potential for liquidity spillovers, particularly to domestic asset markets and emerging economies. Also, a tightening of the fiscal stance may help monetary and debt management, while a monetary tightening will contribute to a worsening of the fiscal position. Hence, on balance fiscal consolidation should generally take priority, all else given. Achieving fiscal sustainability will be a difficult and prolonged process, making it imperative for consolidation to begin as soon as there is clear evidence of self-sustaining recovery. Given a path for fiscal policies, monetary policy can be set to achieve a desired level of overall stimulus, tightening as needed to counter inflationary risks and maintain price stability. While provision of fiscal support will need to be maintained until the recovery gains a solid footing, advanced G-20 governments should lay out credible medium-term plans to reduce public debt ratios. Moreover, they should start implementing immediately elements of these medium-term plans that do not impact negatively on demand. This includes strengthening fiscal institutions to increase the likelihood that fiscal adjustment will take place, and undertaking those reforms of entitlement spending that do not depress consumption—such as increases in the retirement age—or that can be phased in gradually. A failure to implement these measures would threaten fiscal sustainability and reduce growth prospects. To achieve fiscal sustainability, authorities need a credible medium-term fiscal policy strategy that would entail: Clear timeframes to bring the gross debt to GDP ratio to sustainable levels that take into account longer-term spending pressures. Stabilizing debt ratios at their likely post-crisis levels will not be sufficient, as high debt ratios would impede fiscal flexibility, raise economy-wide interest rates, and constrain growth. The appropriate debt target will depend on economy-specific characteristics, including debt composition, depth of domestic financial markets, vulnerability to shocks, and diversification of the investor base. Sustained adjustment in primary structural balances. Experience in past large consolidations indicates that this is the key element in a successful reduction of the debt ratio. In advanced economies, the primary balance adjustment required over the next ten years to return debt ratios to about 60 percent of GDP (80 percent of GDP in Japan) by 2030 is of the order of 8 percentage points of GDP (from a deficit of 3½ percent of GDP in 2010 to a surplus of 4½ percent of GDP in 2020 and keeping it at that level for the following decade). Winding down fiscal stimulus measures could provide only about 1½ percent of GDP—thus additional fiscal measures will be needed (for example, reform of pension and healthcare entitlements). Strong fiscal policy frameworks and institutions with comprehensive coverage of the public sector. Formally adopting or strengthening fiscal rules with explicit fiscal targets and monitoring by independent fiscal agencies could help shore up the necessary broad consensus, anchoring expectations and guiding fiscal policy implementation over the medium-term. 