Short- and medium-term prospects point to a slow, sluggish recovery that is subject to mainly downside risks. Policies need to accelerate the rebalancing of demand from public to private sources in advanced economies and from external deficit to surplus economies. In many advanced economies, the financial sector remains the Achilles heel of recovery prospects for private demand. Insufficient progress with repair and reform is weighing on credit, and slowing the normalization of monetary and fiscal policies, with adverse spillovers on emerging economies. Accelerated financial sector restructuring and reform should thus be top priorities. Government budgetary policies are in the process of moving from short-term stimulus to medium-term consolidation. However, fiscal policies need to urgently deliver measures that lower deficits over the medium-term. This is needed not only to halt and ultimately reverse the large rise in public debt ratios, but also to help create room for policy maneuver to support private demand. Additionally, fiscal adjustment needs to be supported with structural reform. Policies that eliminate distortions to domestic demand in key emerging economies would strengthen prospects for external demand rebalancing, supporting a more robust recovery in both emerging and advanced economies. Fiscal adjustment needs to begin in 2011. Fiscal consolidation remains essential for strong, sustained growth over the medium run. If downside risks to global growth materialize, threatening to slow growth appreciably more than expected, monetary policy should be the first line of defense, although this line has become thin. Accordingly, in countries with fiscal room, automatic stabilizers should be allowed to play freely, and where stabilizers are small, temporary support, such as extended unemployment benefits or wage subsidies, could be continued. Additionally, to sustain recovery in these countries some of the consolidation planned for 2011 might also have to be temporarily postponed. Policymakers need to specify further measures and begin to deliver on ambitious, credible and “growth-friendly” medium-term consolidation plans, particularly in key advanced economies. Plans should emphasize policy measures that reform rapidly growing spending programs—pensions and public health care2—and make permanent reductions to non-entitlement spending, with a view to improving medium-term conditions for labor supply and investment. Moderate adjustments, such as increasing the retirement age, may entail no affect on demand in the short-run. Strengthening fiscal institutions, such as by improving budgetary processes, better fiscal monitoring, and, in the EU, improving the governance framework can play important roles in consolidation. The timing, pace, and sequence of exiting from supportive policies will vary by country, depending on how robust the recovery of private demand as well as financial conditions. In most G-20 advanced economies, public debt sustainability requires exits from crisis-induced policies as well as broader adjustments to improve net debt levels. Reflecting market concerns, vulnerable economies have front-loaded fiscal adjustment. There is increasing divergence in the monetary policy stances between advanced and emerging economies, reflecting macroeconomic developments, while financial sector support has been extended in some European countries. The timing and pace of fiscal consolidation will vary across the G-20, dictated by differing country circumstances. Countries that have come under market pressure and those facing the greatest fiscal challenges/lacking fiscal room have already started to consolidate and announced further front-loading (see below). In these countries, strong signals to see these adjustments through, even if politically difficult, will be critical to prevent adverse market reaction that forces yet additional front-loaded adjustment. Most other advanced G-20 economies should start tightening in 2011, and the average adjustment implicit in current plans appears broadly appropriate. 