Substantial fiscal consolidation in many advanced economies is in the pipeline, but clear and credible medium-term fiscal consolidation frameworks need to be in place as soon as possible, particularly in the United States where the crisis has worsened debt dynamics on top of long-term pressures from entitlement spending. Medium-term fiscal adjustment needs in emerging economies are generally smaller. Deficits in most advanced economies remain well above the levels that would stabilize or reduce debt ratios. In particular, to reduce debt ratios to the precrisis median of 60 percent of GDP (net debt of 80 percent for Japan), the average projected adjustment of 3¾ percent of GDP between 2010 and 2016 amounts to less than half that needed through 2020. The key principles underlying fiscal consolidation plans, which may vary by country, should include: Flexible responses to macroeconomic conditions. In all advanced economies, additional revenues from faster-than-anticipated growth should be saved. Emerging economies should use revenue buoyancy related to high asset and commodity prices and favorable economic conditions to rebuild fiscal buffers rather than increase spending in the near term. Deep entitlement reforms in advanced economies, particularly in health care, where policymakers will have to balance the need to ensure access with the requirement of maintaining sustainability of public finances. In emerging economies, the challenge will be to improve the coverage of health safety nets while preserving long-term fiscal sustainability, as health indicators are substantially lower than in advanced countries. Revenue measures in economies where adjustment needs are large and/ or revenue ratios are low. Raising revenue by widening tax bases and removing distortions, rather than by raising tax rates, should be part of the adjustment package in some economies. In many countries, the elimination of tax expenditures can contribute to this objective. Developing good fiscal institutions that can provide accurate and timely monitoring of fiscal outturns, better coordination across levels of government, and more medium-term orientation of fiscal policy making, including by establishing and strengthening fiscal rules. 