Cooperative and well-timed policy initiatives—to reduce vulnerabilities and rebalance growth— are needed to sustain the global recovery. In the advanced economies, the most urgent tasks are to alleviate financial stresses in the euro area, develop credible fiscal consolidation plans, boost job creation, and accelerate financial reforms. The key policy challenge in emerging economies is to keep overheating pressures in check and respond appropriately to capital inflows. In key surplus economies, overheating pressures can be alleviated by permitting currency appreciation, facilitating a healthy rebalancing from external to internal demand. Greater commitment is needed to ensure that fiscal policies will restore medium-term debt sustainability in advanced economies. The vulnerability of some sovereigns emphasizes the urgency of formulating credible, medium-term fiscal consolidation plans—not just for countries in the euro periphery, but also for other advanced economies. In the near term, a solidifying of the recovery and diminishing deflationary risks in many large advanced economies creates room for current fiscal consolidation plans to be accelerated. Given recent stimulus measures, the United States and Japan need to strengthen their adjustment credentials by specifying the measures they intend to adopt to honor their commitments to reduce deficits and debt. Those advanced economies that came under renewed market pressure should underscore their commitment to their deficit targets and set up contingency plans to ensure that adjustment goals are met. The recently announced tax cuts in the United States are projected to only have a modest impact on growth outcomes, but have a large budgetary cost. It has thus become even more important to articulate a credible fiscal consolidation plan, including entitlement reforms, caps on discretionary spending, higher revenues through reforms of the tax system, and the establishment or strengthening of fiscal institutions. Plans should build on constructive ideas from the Fiscal Commission and others. Successful fiscal adjustment will require medium-term consolidation plans to be accompanied by structural reforms that increase competitiveness, particularly in the euro area and Japan. These policies would raise potential growth and help to support fiscal solvency in the long term. Reforms are particularly needed in the areas of labor and product and services markets, such as those that facilitate greater competition (and lower markups), lower hiring costs, reduce long-term unemployment (by facilitating re-entry), encourage job search, matching, and mobility, and eliminate dual labor markets. 