Fiscal consolidation should be gradual and sustained. Considerable adjustment has already occurred, but many advanced economies still have a long way to go. On average, in advanced economies, the ratio of cyclically-adjusted general government balances to potential GDP is projected to improve by about ¾ percent of potential GDP in 2012 and 1 percent in 2013. In emerging economies as a group, no substantial consolidation is envisaged for this year or next. It is essential to calibrate the pace of adjustment with both the state of the economy and funding pressures in mind. The amount of planned fiscal consolidation in advanced economies appears relatively sizable over the near term—consistent with high debt and the slight increase in economic growth projected in the WEO— although with significant differences across countries. Where financial conditions permit, automatic stabilizers should be allowed to operate, and fiscal targets should be specified in cyclically-adjusted or structural terms. In case of large negative shocks or growth disappointments, the pace of consolidation should be smoothed in countries that can afford it. United States authorities should act early to avoid the fiscal cliff and raise the debt ceiling. While markets view a major disruption associated with these issues as a tail risk, the uncertainty about when and how they will be resolved may be weighing on demand. Importantly, a last minute deal that relies on suboptimal fixes or largely ―kicks the can down the road‖ may ultimately prove harmful. Moreover, if contrary to the expectations a resolution is not found, confidence in United States policymakers will erode— which could have large domestic and international ramifications. Fiscal adjustment must be anchored by concrete and ambitious medium-term consolidation plans. At the moment, the United States lacks agreement on such a plan, and Japan’s plan needs to be strengthened further despite the recent welcome approval of a timetable for doubling the consumption tax rate. Adjustments would be required on both expenditure and revenue sides of the ledger. It is important to move early to reduce the growth of aging-related expenditures—and while some measures have been enacted in Europe to reduce retirement costs, more can be done in all advanced economies, particularly to lower health-related spending. More robust fiscal frameworks would support the credibility of adjustment plans. 