In advanced economies, macroeconomic policies should support growth. Supporting growth and creating jobs is the main challenge in the major advanced economies. Broadly speaking, monetary policy accommodation should continue to play its supportive role, given low inflation and still large output gaps, and fiscal adjustment should be measured, while being anchored by a credible medium-term roadmap for sustainability. Financial sector reforms also need to be urgently completed. The pace and composition of fiscal adjustment should be calibrated carefully to avoid an excessive drag on growth and be anchored by credible and concrete medium-term plans. Despite sizable consolidation efforts, fiscal imbalances remain large in advanced economies due to weak growth and unfavorable initial fiscal positions with respect to sustainability. The growth disappointments in turn partly reflected the negative effect of fiscal adjustment on shortterm growth and the fact that in some countries (France, Spain, UK), private demand has not been picking up from public demand. Financial sector support measures also burdened fiscal accounts in some countries. In the United States, while private demand has gained momentum, this year’s large fiscal consolidation is excessive in light of the still nascent recovery. Similarly, in Japan, despite an expansionary fiscal stance this year, substantial consolidation is in the pipeline for the next two years as a result of the two-step increase in the consumption tax rate to 10 percent and the waning of stimulus and reconstruction spending. In the near term, a more gradual pace of fiscal adjustment would be preferable, but conditional on having a credible and specific medium-term consolidation plan in place. Specifically: In the United States, the budget sequester should be replaced by a more balanced and gradual pace of fiscal consolidation in the short term, with more efficient and targeted spending cuts. The debt ceiling should be raised expeditiously and a multi-year consolidation plan that tackles entitlement and tax reforms should also be adopted to restore long-run fiscal sustainability. In Japan, the implementation of the planned consumption tax increase next year is critical to maintain confidence in the ability of the government to address the fiscal problem. An ambitious and concrete consolidation plan beyond 2015, based equally on revenue and spending, is also urgently needed. With such a plan in place, some fiscal space would be created to smooth the fiscal adjustment in 2014–15 should growth disappoint. In the euro area, the extension of the EDP deadlines and the assessment of adjustment in structural terms are welcome, but the extra space should be used to act decisively on fiscal and structural reforms. Consolidation should be based on an efficient and “growth-friendly” mix of expenditure and revenue measures, supported by appropriate structural reforms that enhance potential growth. Spain needs a credible and detailed medium-term plan, while France needs to rebalance adjustment toward expenditure containment. In the United Kingdom, it is important that fiscal policy supports the nascent recovery by pursuing fiscal measures that would alleviate supply-side constraints and also provide support for private demand—within the context of its medium-term fiscal framework. 