Fiscal consolidation should continue at a gradual pace, while preserving the long-term growth potential of the economy. While debt ratios should start declining from 2015 onward, fiscal deficits remain high relative to pre-crisis levels and there is still some way to go to rebuild policy buffers and bring debt ratios to prudent levels. Fiscal consolidation should continue at a gradual pace, within the framework of concrete medium-term plans (notably in Japan and the United States). At the same time, past fiscal consolidation has been heavily focused on tax increases and wage and public investment cuts, exacerbating the trend decline in public capital stocks. Going forward, the design of fiscal policy should be careful to support the long-run growth potential of the economies, including by enhancing infrastructure investment, which will also boost demand. Consolidation should rely on a more balanced distribution of spending cuts, where revenue ratios are already high. where there is scope to raise revenues, the emphasis should be on broadening the tax base. Specifically: In the United States, the December 2013 budget agreement was an encouraging example of bipartisanship and provided partial relief from the sequester. However, it remains essential to reduce uncertainty surrounding the conduct of fiscal policy, by raising the debt limit in a more durable manner and adopting a balanced and comprehensive medium-term fiscal plan (including entitlement and tax reforms) that puts public debt on a downward path. In Japan, the decision to implement the first phase of the consumption tax increase sent a strong signal about the government’s resolve to tackle the country’s fiscal imbalances. However, much more is needed to put the debt ratio on a downward path. the recent fiscal stimulus package increased the urgency of a concrete medium-term consolidation plan. The implementation of the second stage of consumption tax rate increase in 2015 is of great importance, and should go ahead. If, however, growth slows considerably, fiscal measures could be considered in the context of a credible consolidation strategy. In the euro area, the overall fiscal stance planned for 2014 is neutral, although a number of countries are still tightening, even if at a slower pace. This is broadly appropriate. However, if low growth persists and monetary policy options are depleted, the flexibility in the current fiscal framework may need to be used to respond in these circumstances. Further progress is also needed in improving national fiscal governance in the context of recent fiscal institutions reforms in the euro area. 