The pace and composition of fiscal adjustment should be attuned to supporting both the recovery and long-term growth. Fiscal consolidation should continue to proceed gradually, anchored in credible medium-term plans, which are still lacking in some countries (notably, in Japan and the United States). At the same time, the design of fiscal policy should better support the long-run growth potential of the economy, including by enhancing infrastructure investment, provided that infrastructure needs have been identified, there is slack in the economy, monetary policy is accommodative, investment processes are relatively efficient, and debt-to-GDP ratios are not already high. Specifically: In the United States, reaching an agreement on a credible, medium-term consolidation plan that puts debt on a downward trajectory should be a high priority. This should include steps to contain health care costs, reform social security, and increase revenues. In the absence of such a comprehensive agreement, efforts should still focus on identifying more modest opportunities to relax the near term budget envelope, paid for with future fiscal savings. In particular, frontloading infrastructure spending would be a good candidate, given the urgent need to upgrade the quality of United States infrastructure. The United States should also consider some changes to budget procedures to lessen fiscal policy uncertainty, including:  reaching bipartisan agreement on a clear and simple medium-term fiscal objective,  an automatic process that raises the debt ceiling once agreement is reached on the broad budget parameters, and  a budget cycle where annual spending levels are agreed for a two-year period. In the euro area, the overall fiscal stance is broadly neutral, although a number of countries are still tightening, even if at a slower pace. This strikes the right balance between demand support and debt reduction. Nevertheless, Germany, which has completed its fiscal consolidation, could afford to finance much-needed public investment in infrastructure, without violating fiscal rules. Large negative growth surprises in euro area countries should not trigger additional consolidation efforts, which would be self-defeating. Moreover, if deflation risks materialize and monetary policy options are depleted, the escape clauses in the fiscal framework may need to be used to respond in these circumstances. In Japan, the second stage of the consumption tax increase should proceed with a uniform rate (from 8 to 10 percent in October 2015). Concerns that it could harm low-income households should be addressed through targeted subsidies instead of reducing tax rates on essential items. The pace of fiscal withdrawal in 2014–15 is broadly appropriate, but a concrete post-2015 fiscal consolidation plan remains urgently needed, which would allow more near-term flexibility to respond to downside risks. Plans to lower the corporate tax rate would likely have growth benefits, but would require offsetting fiscal measures to prevent a further rise in fiscal risks. 