To secure a strong and durable recovery, policies need a decisive upgrade. Raising both actual and potential output through a combination of demand support and structural reforms remains a key policy objective. In advanced economies, accommodative monetary policy remains essential. Fiscal policy should be more supportive where conditions allow, even as credible medium-term budget plans are put in place. Many emerging economies have limited scope for monetary and fiscal policy to support growth, with inflation still above target in some economies, and fiscal positions weaker than desirable in others. Where feasible, exchange rate flexibility should serve as a shock absorber, with a temporary role for both intervention and capital flow management measures when market conditions turn disorderly. Joint efforts by deficit and surplus economies to rebalance global demand would reduce excess external imbalances while sustaining growth. Helping China in its difficult transition will also reduce tail risks and facilitate stronger, more durable global growth. Collective effort is also required to further enhance global safety nets and strengthen the International Monetary System. Fiscal policy should be more supportive where conditions allow, even as credible plans to reduce public debt ratios over the longer run are put in place. Public debt levels are at historic highs. managing them in a low-growth environment will be more challenging once interest rates normalize. Fiscal consolidation should remain growth friendly and be anchored in credible medium-term plans supported by well-designed fiscal frameworks. It should also protect the most vulnerable. In the United States, the priority remains to agree on a medium-term fiscal consolidation plan to prepare for rising aging-related costs, including higher tax revenue. The recent Congressional passage of a two-year budget, including a suspended debt ceiling, is a critical step to support the economy. In the euro area, countries should adhere to their commitments under EU fiscal rules, but those with fiscal space, notably Germany and the Netherlands, could do more to encourage growth, especially through much-needed public infrastructure investment and supporting structural reforms. In Japan, the announced medium-term fiscal consolidation plan provides a useful anchor to guide fiscal policy. The aim should be to put debt on a downward path, based on realistic assumptions and identifying specific revenue and expenditure measures. 