Short-term demand support still has an important part to play in advanced economies, but needs greater emphasis on growth-friendly fiscal policies. In a majority of advanced countries, output gaps remain negative, weak labor markets threaten to permanently scar especially the young in the workforce, and inflation is low and far off target. Where monetary policy is becoming overburdened, domestic policy coordination can help to make macroeconomic support effective. This requires a broad-based approach combining all available policy tools and strong policy frameworks, which anchor fiscal and monetary policy in the long run while allowing for effective demand management in the short run. Specifically: Fiscal policy. Where monetary policy space is narrowing and there is fiscal space, fiscal policy can help support demand and close output gaps—including through measures that will strengthen growth also in the medium and long term (for example, Canada, Korea) or, where necessary, facilitate balance sheet repair. In most countries, it will be important to adjust expenditure priorities to finance reforms that increase potential output (for example, Germany). For the euro area, the use of centralized investment funds to support infrastructure investment in countries without fiscal space would be appropriate. A coordinated use of fiscal space would be beneficial should the global outlook weaken materially. Policy frameworks. Strong fiscal frameworks that ensure sustainability over the longer term, coupled with fiscal reforms, help increase or safeguard policy space in the short run (for example, United States, Japan). In the United States, achieving a sustained downward medium-term path for public debt would require a comprehensive reform of the tax system, pension reform, and further healthcare cost containment. In Japan, the pre-announcement of a gradual path of consumption tax hikes is needed. In the euro area, the priority is to make full use of the flexibility within existing rules. In the medium-term, stricter enforcement and simplifying the Stability and Growth Pact will make it more effective. There is also a strong case for expanding centralized fiscal support. 