In the United States, monetary policy should continue to gradually normalize and remain data dependent, and plans for the Fed’s balance sheet should be well-communicated. fiscal policy should ensure that the ratio of debt to GDP is on a downward path, while supporting the longer-term potential of the economy. In contrast, where inflation is still below central bank targets and output gaps remain negative, monetary policy should stay supportive (Japan, euro area) and available fiscal space should be used actively to provide further additional support. A more expansionary fiscal stance in Germany would not only allow a much-needed increase in public investment and raise potential output, it would also support external adjustment, while at the same time having positive spillovers to other euro area economies where there is still cyclical slack. In countries where fiscal adjustment is needed to avoid destabilizing debt dynamics and rebuild policy buffers, consolidation is appropriate and should be supported by growth-friendly measures (for example, in Italy). Where tradeoffs occur, fiscal policy can play a mitigating role. Where fiscal space is available, fiscal policy can help foster innovation and structural change in labor, product, and services markets, including through demand support for certain reforms. Fiscal policy can also ease the adjustment of those adversely affected by technological change or increasing economic integration (for example, job counseling and retraining, apprenticeship programs for youth, support for life-long learning, measures in areas such as housing, credit, and infrastructure to increase mobility). It can protect the vulnerable through better-targeted social safety nets financed by well- designed progressive taxes. Countries with limited fiscal space can provide support in a budget- neutral manner (for example, by using savings from unemployment benefit reforms to improve job training programs). Ongoing IMF work and country experiences also suggest that the use of digital technology holds the potential for better targeted and efficient fiscal policy, ensuring a reduction in spending leakages and greater transparency. 